Now, this might seem like a totally
normal thing to say, but I find it hard
to admit, however, easy to explain that
those traditional difficulty settings in
games kind of suck. And they suck for a
very specific reason. Because often,
they demand the player choose a hardness
seconds after they boot up a game for
the first time. But how are we supposed
to know what difficulty level is best
for us when we haven't even played the
game yet? What if the direction the game
goads us towards is just plain wrong for
the experience we're going for? And how
might our egos be feeding into all of
this jazz? Well, what if I told you that
there are actually better design
strategies for difficulty settings, and
that you've already probably played
games that use them?
>> [music]
>> Thanks so much to Nebula for continuing
to be the best deal in streaming. Kick
off your New Year's right by treating
yourself to all of the ad-free goodness
Nebula has to offer, including our two
weekly long-form gaming series, Design
Club Live and Games for Breakfast. Real
quick, Up Top, please welcome video
essayist, streamer, and my favorite
person to tier rank Hyrulean abilities
in front of a live PAX audience with
Jenna Steeber, who guest wrote this
episode. Thanks for flipping this to
easy mode, Jenna. Today, we think of
difficulty settings as being about
letting the player control their own
experience. But that, my friends, has
not always been their purpose. The
earliest difficulty settings were
totally out of reach for the player. And
if you think this means we're going to
go into a video game history portion,
you are absolutely correct. Back in ye
old arcade days, some machines had
internal hardware called dip switches,
which were only accessible by the
cabinet's owner. This allowed them to
alter things like the number of starting
lives, or swap between a hard mode and
easy mode. And if a game was a hit, they
could even increase the number of coins
required to play, monsters. But another
phenomenon that would forever be
entwined with a game's difficulty was
also born under the smoking neon lights
of a local arcade. I'm talking about, of
course, competition.
In the public arena of an arcade, the
leaderboard was an official document
proving who the most elite gamers in
town were. Conquering a game, especially
something notoriously punishing like
Ghosts 'n Goblins or Sinistar, meant you
were the best of the best. So, if you
told a player that there were difficulty
settings that they might have benefited
from an easier challenge than their
competitors elsewhere, they'd be hurt
and angry, their egos bruised. Now, hold
that thought for a moment. We're going
to circle back to competitiveness in a
minute. Meanwhile, in the home market,
the Atari 2600 also had hardware
difficulty settings, this time in reach
of the player. By flipping the AB
switch, two players could compete at
different levels, like a pre-made
younger sibling mode. For single-player
games like Adventure, flipping the
switch would slow down the boss fight or
even skip it entirely. This was on top
of the skill levels Adventure already
had. Level two was the base game, level
one simplified the layout design, and
level three randomized the location of
items, refreshing the game for even
expert adventurers. And these options
were often as much about adding replay
value as they were about difficulty.
Then, by the early '90s, easy, normal,
and hard became standard options in
video games, though they still weren't
the same difficulty settings that we
know and have some mixed feelings about
today. Because many of the games in this
era actually weren't beatable on easy.
Titles like Twisted Metal 2 and Sailor
Moon gated you out of about half the
game in easy mode. You would have to
take the leap into normal if you wanted
to see the rest. But this locking off of
content wasn't really to punish the
player for choosing a difficulty setting
the developers didn't like. Rather, easy
mode functioned like a tutorial in an
era where plenty of games didn't have
one. Double Dragon 2 actually made this
explicit. Its easy mode, which only
takes you to stage three, is literally
called practice. Now, this era of gaming
also did see a lot of arcade addicts
turn into developers, some of whom, like
the bad boy devs at id Software, brought
the competitiveness of arcade culture
with them. But soon that pride of
accomplishment seemed to curdle into the
desire to shame others for not enduring
the same pixelated hardships. Difficulty
levels seemed to be begrudgingly offered
and implemented in kind of humiliating
ways, decrying that folks who played on
easy were wusses, wimps, tourists, and
babies. Although Wolfenstein: The New
Order ironically retained these
settings, most studios gave up on this
schoolyard bullying vernacular by the
mid-2000s. Difficulty settings started
to be about the experience a player
wanted to have, rather than how skilled
they were. Long-running franchises
shifted their terminology, like Mass
Effect changing their casual setting to
be called narrative, allowing gamers to
lust after characters reads Garrus
without the pressure of action. Baldur's
Gate 3 and recent Assassin's Creed games
also offered things like explorer or
discovery modes that opened up the
incredible world building of these
titles to people simply uninterested in
combat. Then, bucking that trend, the
Souls games came along and denied
players the relief of a traditional
difficulty setting. Instead, they
allowed players to experiment with
different builds and weapons to find a
balance between challenge and
frustration. Different technique,
different implementation, but still the
same desired effect. It was all in the
player's hands. Of course, this did lead
some FromSoftware fans to deputize
themselves sheriffs of gameplay,
determining what the right way to play
was. But you know, for more on that, you
cowpokes can check out our last episode
on Soulsborne possum building. Yeehaw.
So, [clears throat] clearly, not
everyone engages with a game's
difficulty in the same way. And if a
studio spends millions of dollars and
years of development on a project, they
really need as many people as possible
to play it and enjoy it, which means
acknowledging different skill levels,
play types, and accessibility needs. And
on the surface, classic difficulty
settings seem like a great solution for
this Goldilocks problem. What's just
right for, say, Baby Bear might be
boring for Mama Bear and stressful for
Papa Bear. So, Baby Bear stays on normal
while Papa Bear moves to easy and gets a
stronger bed or something. And Mama Bear
plays on hard to get tougher porridge, I
guess. Okay, but then what if Papa Bear
is embarrassed to play on easy mode?
What if Mama Bear finds hard mode too
intimidating? And really, the big
question here is how are any of them
supposed to know what difficulty setting
they should be on when they are just
simple woodland bears and dear god, a
rune bear is behind me right now, isn't
it?
Okay, let's move on. This isn't just a
hypothetical. In a recent update for the
first Berserker Kazan, creative director
Junho Lee explained that they thought
players would switch difficulty if they
were struggling, but the data told a
different story. Players would rather
quit than change to easy mode. The devs
report that when they asked, players
said they would, quote, "rather quit
with dignity than drop it down to easy."
Or to put it another way, a player would
rather deny themselves a game that they
paid for than admit they'd overestimated
their skills. This is why traditional
difficulty settings actually do suck.
The settings menu usually pops up the
first time you crack open a new game
around the same time you're turning on
the subtitles and adjusting the
brightness. That is when a player knows
the least about the challenges a game
contains, which really makes it the
worst time to have a player commit to
that. Also, easy, normal, and hard are
totally opaque terms. Different folks,
those all could mean very different
things. What if a developer thinks fewer
enemies is easier when I just want more
ammo so I can take more shots? Or like a
boss with more health could be harder,
but I think we all know that also just
might mean it's longer, and that doesn't
always translate to more fun. Without
additional information, most people,
like myself, will default to normal. And
if that's too tough, many times my only
option is to retreat to easy, if I even
remember that as an option. Which, if I
am being honest with myself, also never
really feels right to me because I have
that little voice inside my gamer head
saying, "You've been playing video games
since you were eight. There is no way
you should be playing on easy." And I
know that is not logical, but I don't
think I'm alone here. So, what is a bean
to do, right? Well, luckily, game design
is all about fixing problems like this,
and devs have created some pretty cool
practical solutions. Like recently, a
few games have skipped offering a
difficulty setting, instead offering
difficulty settings. That's right, they
put an S on there. Celeste's assist mode
offers micro adjustments that can be
made right in the settings menu, from
infinite stamina and invincibility to
smaller tweaks like slowing down
gameplay. Instead of one big immediate
choice with unclear consequences,
finding a satisfying balance is as easy
as lowering the music. Okay, so the
Celeste-type solution is giving players
complete agency, right? But what about a
difficulty settings solution that
completely robs the player of their
agency? Now, when I hear this, my lizard
brain is once again screaming,
"I don't want that!" But it is possible
it might be one of the most effective
solutions. And chances are, we've all
played games that use this option
without us even knowing it. Enter
adaptive difficulty. Adaptive
difficulty, or dynamic balancing if
you're nasty, is when a game secretly
changes mechanics, like enemy health or
ammo drops, in response to how a player
has played previously. While it's not
very common, it's actually in more games
than you probably realize. For instance,
did you know that 2025's surprise mega
success Blueprints had a secret setting?
Ooh, yeah. Veteran player mode, or
V-mode, activates when a player on a new
save file drafts three rooms in under 35
seconds. In this mode, luck and room
rarity were boosted to where they would
be around day 21, making it much easier
to reach room 46 in a single day. Of
course, if you haven't played the game,
that probably sounds like productivity
software run amok, but basically what
blueprints is assuming is that if you
draft quickly, you must already know
what the rooms are and adjust the
gameplay to fit that type of player. And
it might seem like it made the game
easier, but it's more accurate to say it
changed the pacing to match the speed of
an advanced player. Resident Evil 4 has
a hidden feature named game rank that
tweaks levels based on how the player
has played so far. If you get hit or
miss an attack, your rank decreases,
causing enemies to slow down, do less
damage, and have lower health. Whereas
killing enemies or evading attacks
increases your game rank, spawning more
enemies and making them more evasive.
This is also relative to the actual
difficulty the player chooses, acting as
a subtle gradation between things like
easy normal and normal hard. Early works
from Insomniac Games featured what the
devs called automatic challenge tuning
or ACT. Like in Ratchet & Clank, did you
know that more Nanotech crates would
spawn for players that died a lot,
providing additional ammo and boosts?
And it worked well enough that they
added more tuning in later Ratchet
games. But to be clear, ACT wasn't
conceptualized as a way to make the
games easier or harder. Rather, they
wanted it to be used to make the games
just right for every kind of player that
might play the game. Then for our next
example, we go to one of my favorite
games of all time, zombie shooter Left 4
Dead. It had what lead designer Mike
Booth called adaptive dramatic pacing.
Booth found that in Counter-Strike
games, unpredictable peaks and valleys
of intensity made for the best
experiences. Because like constant
combat was exhausting, but inactivity
was boring. So, he created a system that
tracked the expected feelings of a
player with a metric called emotional
intensity. In Left 4 Dead, emotional
intensity increased when things went
bad. If a player took damage, it
increased proportional to how much
damage they took. If an infected died
nearby, it increased based on how close
that call was. Then another adaptive
system called the director used this
metric to cycle through different action
modes. So, like if the intensity for the
team got too high, the director would
take note and back off, removing big
threats from the field to let players
find their footing. Emotional intensity
then decayed when there was no activity,
like a heart rate slowing down after a
sudden burst of fear. Once the metric
stayed at a minimum threshold for a
round 30 to 45 seconds, that sucker
ramped right back up. High tension was
then balanced with relative calm, paced
according to how skilled the players
were. And before Jenna dove into this, I
had known about the director system, of
course, they used that on the box, but I
hadn't really conceptualized how that
would function around the relative
skills players were displaying while
playing the game. So, it's just
fascinating stuff. Of course, Left 4
Dead 2 took this idea even further,
having its actual maps change in
response to player activity. For
instance, the placement of gravestones
in the cemetery and the pathing in the
mall alter based on how well a team is
doing. Skilled players get longer routes
and more challenges thrown in their way.
As with Adventure back in the Atari 2600
days, these dynamic elements were meant
to increase the game's longevity,
preventing veteran players from
memorizing levels and stash placements
and feeling like the game got stale.
Okay, so if dynamic difficulty works so
well and feels so good, why don't more
games implement it? Well, first of all,
it is technically very challenging, but
it's not really just that. Actually, you
might have noticed that all the examples
I just gave do have one specific thing
in common. None of them are called
difficulty settings by the devs, despite
the fact that they operate in similar
ways with similar goals. That is just
how difficulty
settings are. Even internally studios
don't want to use that vocabulary. And a
really good microcosm of this issue was
actually on the useless podcast, where
former Insomniac devs Mike Stout and
Tony Garcia recounted breaking a lot of
hearts while pushing for act. Fellow
game devs were surprised to hear that
Ratchet & Clank had dynamic difficulty.
They were devastated to learn that the
game might have helped them
specifically. Granted with dynamic
difficulty, they might also not have
received help, but just the idea that
they possibly benefited from act kind of
hurt their feelings. Meaning dynamic
tuning can feel unfair or even
patronizing if a player notices it. But
I think the more important thing is
this. If any of us have played these
games and didn't know it was helping us
out, I think I'd like to push the lizard
part of my brain that screams when
learning about this sort of stuff just
deep deep down and consider being
impressed at how well these games were
made to deliver us the most optimal
gameplay possible for us specifically.
You know, rather than feeling tricked or
fooled. So in summation, some people
want to believe in a meritocracy, where
a specific game is the same difficulty
for all players and nobody has an
advantage or disadvantage.
But that's just not how the world works,
in game or out. And of course this isn't
to discount like a multiplayer game
situation where everyone playing the
same match has the same set of rules for
fairness, etc. It's more to point out
that at the end of the day, game
designers need the most people to have
the best time with the games they make.
That's the business of game design. More
people buy it, they can make more games.
So, when you are looking at the games
you play, or even when designing your
own, remember that we are not all
beholden to the easy, normal, or hard
mode of it all. And while it might seem
odd to rob a player of their agency in
the name of giving them a better
experience, if I'm being honest, that
does kind of seem like what game design
is all about in the first place. So,
when looking at it in that context, I'm
pretty sure that both my lizard brain
and ego would be happy to take the hit.
Till next time, everyone.
And if you'd like to continue to add
more gaming goodness to your internet
diet, then check out the new Extra
Credits live channel over on Nebula to
see our weekly long-form shows Design
Club Live and Games for Breakfast all
ad-free. Or check out another of our
animated design delves here.
You would not believe that Angela
Valenciana, Dominic Valenciana, Frizo
Van Santen, Hunter Z, Joseph Blain,
Lotus Wolf, Thomas Tate, and Ziliac's
Architectures were the best legendary
patrons, BUT I GOT TO TELL YOU, I don't
know any other way to label them.
