Tunic is a videogame that appears upon first
glance to be a shameless legend of zelda ripoff,
it’s got bushes you can cut down with a
sword, a plot that’s mostly about collecting
three of a shape and a cutesy main character
who doesn’t talk much all dressed in green.
Later on, you’ll revise your opinion and
realise that it’s actually a shameless dark
souls ripoff in disguise, it’s got bonfires,
it’s ruined kingdoms and hard bosses that
love killing you.
It’s only once you’ve gotten past the
tutorial that Tunic’s true identity is revealed,
you went in expecting an isometric action
game, with dungeons and bosses but Tunic is
actually…
on second thoughts - I’m not going to tell
you just yet.
See, I think the real genius idea that makes
Tunic work, and allows it to be constantly
surprising and inventive is that it is fantastic
at doing something that we often take for
granted and that is a game design technique
that I’m going to keep a secret forever…
Nah, I’m just messing with you.
What tunic is great at is carefully withholding
and obscuring information from the player.
To that effect, Tunic is a game best experienced
blind so I won’t give you any big spoilers
here, most of what you’re going to see is
from the early game.
And besides, sometimes having an extra pair
of eyes on some things can improve the experience,
just saying.
In tunic, information on where to go, what
various items do and even basic game mechanics
are hidden in pages of an ingame manual that
you have to find and piece together yourself
as you play, and even then basically all of
this information is written in what may as
well be an incomprehensible alien language
like french.
Crucially, though, it doesn’t drop you in
blind, whilst Tunic gives you almost zero
direct instruction on how to do anything,
it does give you an entire world of puzzles
and riddles to prod, experiment with and analyse,
making learning the game’s myriad hidden
systems and rules a rewarding challenge in
of themselves.
By contrast - a lot of other, more mainstream
videogames, have really interesting systems,
worlds and ideas that are kind of ruined a
bit by an over-eagerness to explain everything.
Find a new enemy?
Here’s a big dossier on everything they
can do.
Get a new ability?
Here’s a detailed explanation of all of
its possible applications.
Die?
Here’s some tips to stop that from happening
next time.
This stuff’s not bad, in many cases it’s
quite helpful, but equally, a lot of this
information is stuff that it would’ve been
more fun to figure out myself.
Take Deathloop for example.
The core premise of the game is figuring out
how to execute all of the game’s visionaries
in a single Deathloop which is a fantastic
challenge that really encourages paying attention
to how each area changes, reading logs examining
the bases of each visionary to learn what
makes them tick and and oh wait no, the game
just sort of tells you how to pull off the
perfect hit in a series of big animated cutscenes.
Great.
Cheers.
Thanks Deathloop.
The key advantage of games choosing not to
make information easy to access is it allows
them to create a rising arc of not just of
gameplay level power or raw mechanical skill,
but your very understanding of the game.
In many games, how much you know peaks very
early, and then levels off, which doesn’t
match the way your skills and relative power
are constantly increasing - but in games like
Tunic, there’s an entirely separate axis
of mastery for players to contend with that’s
normally given to them for free.
To prove it, here, apropo of nothing is me
solving the biggest hardest puzzle in the
game, this, right here, what I’m doing right
now - is me solving it yep there it goes boom.
For people who haven’t played the game,
and probably most of the people who haven’t
beaten it yet, this is so many levels of understanding
removed that it’s not even a spoiler, what
am I doing here?
You don’t know.
But I bet you’re wondering, and that’s
kind of the point.
This journey from knowing nothing to knowing
everything is inherently motivating because
human beings love learning stuff, and thus
it can also be the source of some incredibly
satisfying moments…
as well as some incredibly frustrating ones
- but I’m getting ahead of myself, for now
let’s focus on how games denying us info
can actually make them more effective at conveying
it.
I think the best way to actually explain what
I’m on about here is to look at tutorials,
in most videogames, you are greeted with a
constant barrage of hints, tips, tricks and
instructions right from the outset, ostensibly
designed to make the game more approachable
and easier to understand - but often having
the opposite effect.
In, say, your average fighting game, most
of your actual instruction consists of a big
list of every combo in the game aaaand that's
about it, you get a load of raw information
- but no real space to actually understand
the core concepts of a fighting game like
spacing or punishes, just a set of weirdly
named moves you’ve got to try and fumble
your way through whilst getting your butt
kicked.
On the flopside, Xenoblade 2 constantly interrupts
otherwise fun gameplay with intrusive and
not very helpful tutorials so often that you’ll
probably start ignoring them and then miss
the rare one single time the tutorial popups
mention crucial mechanics.
In spite of how overbearing the game is, it
still sometimes just gives you bad advice,
following the tutorial will trick you into
thinking pouch items are garbage because it
makes you use ones that are flat out garbage.
Cool.
By instead making teaching the player more
of an exercise in experimentation and discovery
than rote memorisation, Tunic’s learning
moments stick in your mind much more effectively
because you’ve got to work for them.
Take for example the first magic item in the
game, the magic dagger.
In spite of the fact that it’s the first
magic item you can access, I guarantee you
most players didn’t actually get it until
much later in the game Why?
Because unless you’re paying attention,
you won’t even know it exists.To get the
magic dagger, you’ve got to realise it’s
a magic item at all, and then recognize it
on a map of this early game area, requiring
you to go off the beaten path to find it.
Not only that, the game doesn’t actually
tell you what the magic dagger does, you’ve
got to try it out for yourself and woah!
Cool ice blast!
Neat!
If tunic had laboriously dragged you over
to this item and spelled out its exact usage
and function before you ever got to play with
it, getting the dagger and mastering it wouldn’t
be anywhere near as fun.
Instead tunic gives you juuuust enough of
a hint to create a little adventure, out of
what could’ve been a boring obligation.
Metroidvanias also love sneaky hidden tutorials,
particularly when it comes to new abilities
- rather than booting you into a big training
area, many of the best ones instantly force
you to use it in the coolest possible way
to proceed.
In Hollow knight, once you’ve gotten the
crystal heart, you get to fly across the map,
searing the sheer scope of this item’s power
into your memory.
Steamworld Dig 2 has an interesting little
twist on this formula, on top of instantly
making you use your new toy in a practical
context, it also gives you a little optional
challenge for players who pick up the basics
quickly and want to push themselves.
In order to get this dumbbell item you’ve
got to figure out you can cancel the grappling
hook to control the force of your ascent,
which is an advanced move you won’t really
need until much later and feels very rewarding
to pull off early.
Of course, it’s not just teaching moments
that can benefit from deliberately hiding
information from the player.
Enemy design, particularly when games are
trying to scare or intimidate us pitiful players,
can be hugely improved with a bit of ambiguity.
Take Golden Light for example, which is a
deeply confusing and upsetting game at the
best of time, riddled with constantly changing
rules and mechanics that obey a hidden and
completely arcane logic you just won’t be
able to get your head around for your first
few hours, it’s great.
This philosophy extends to Golden Light’s
enemy design, I won’t spoil any of the more
advanced stuff but the first enemy type is
mimics, not dissimilar to the ones you might
find in Arkane’s prey - but there’s a
key difference in how each game presents this
enemy type.
Prey gives you a good look at a mimic and
what they do several times before you actually
have to face one, making their presence more
about tension and anticipation.
Golden Light on the other hand gives almost
NO indication that mimics even exist until
doors, plants and piles of trash are rearing
up at a moments notice to take a bite out
of you - giving this fantastic and terrifying
feeling that nothing you see can be trusted,
and also a great feeling of triumph when you
finally learn to spot the signs of a mimic,
because the game certainly didn’t help you
there.
Along similar lines, compare two different
player-chasing boss bad guys, Mr X in resident
evil 2, to the EMMI robots in Metroid Dread.
In resi 2, Mr X just sort of… turns up and
starts trying to murder you.
You have no idea how to beat him, how to escape
him or even why he’s really after you to
begin with, and that unknown factor makes
the big blue guy all the scarier.
Metroid Dread’s EMMI on the other hand,
get a lot of explanation and clarification
before you even really meet one, and most
damningly of all, the game tells you how they
work, and how to get rid of them early on
- so rather than the EMMI robots being these
capricious, unstoppable agents of death, they’re
just these weird obstacles you know hang out
in specific areas, won’t chase you beyond
specific boundaries and you know for a fact
can be killed quite easily once you’ve got
a big giga beam charge.
Metroid Dread is so concerned with helping
the player out, that it neuters a genuinely
creepy enemy design by accident.
I think a lot of the time games are so willing
to give us all the information we need on
enemies in order to give us total strategic
clarity that they actually miss out on some
of the equally entertaining situations that
can arise when you *don’t* know what bad
guys are capable of.
Monster hunter has the genius idea of just
not telling you how much health a monster
is on, forcing you to try and work it out
for yourself and get to know how each beastie
changes when it’s on low health.
If you knew precisely how close a monster
was to death, it would remove a lot of the
tension from the eventual kill and you’d
loose and important facet of the game’s
mastery.
Just as I mentioned earlier, by making knowledge
itself part of a game’s progression structure,
games can also become much more rewarding
in the long term as you’re able to see the
same situations, environments and mechanics
from a new, more educated perspective where
previously they were intimidating.
in XCOM enemy unknown, it’s been a while
since I mentioned this one hasn’t it, the
game is all about you feeling like you’re
on the back foot against the alien war machine,
when you first meet a new alien type like
a terrifying chryssalid - you are given absolutely
no information as to what it can do, meaning
it’s probably going to kick the shit out
of you.
However, after you successfully kill a new
alien and do an autopsy on it, not only do
you get some new gear options, but you can
now bring up this cool stat screen in any
future encounters to see its hit chance, abilities,
defences, all that cool stuff - because XCOM
has done the research into that particular
alien’s physiology.
If this info were available at all times,
I and most other people would’ve probably
ignored it, but by instead framing it as a
reward for choosing to let dr vahlen do a
couple of war crimes, it feels like this awesome
little victory that feeds into the game’s
overall arc of catching up to the aliens technologically.
Xcom isn’t alone here, puzzle games like
Baba is You or The Witness love to psyche
you out with challenges you can’t possibly
beat early on.
Why?
So that you can eventually come back with
some more knowledge under your belt and see
for yourself just how far you’ve come in
a way that wouldn’t be possible with a linear
difficulty curve.
Antichamber does this really well too actually,
failing this early puzzle actually drops you
into the tutorial, meaning experienced players
can just skip it outright and start playing,
it’s really cool.
As you might’ve expected, Tunic does the
same thing, you will go into the game not
really understanding anything, but you can
measure your progress by how many of the world’s
mysteries you can uncover and decipher.
One of the first things you see when you start
playing is this weird golden platform.
It clearly does SOMETHING but damn if you’ll
be able to figure out what that is.
However, by slowly piecing together the information,
and even having multiple different puzzles
converge, you’ll eventually be able to work
it out and have your mind blown at an ability
you had the entire time, but just weren’t
aware of.
Introducing an additional axis of progression
and challenge in the form of knowledge can
be great, but the informational obscuration
of Tunic and its contemporaries, which is
very fun to say, also has a downside.
If information itself is now a source of challenge,
then these games also create another avenue
for players to become stuck, one that can’t
be overcome with practice or a change of strategy.
In Super Metroid for example, if you don’t
know that there’s a sprint button, and why
would you - the game never tells you, you
can literally never get past this crumbling
bridge at the end of brinstar and even if
they do make it past, players will probably
run into the same problem when it comes to
the speed booster and shinespark.
Even universally heralded examples of zero-tutorial
learn-by-doing figure it out yourself game
design can run into this trap when new players
are concerned.
As Razbuten’s excellent series gaming for
a non-gamer shows, super mario bros world
1-1’s carefully designed obscured tutorial
quickly falls apart if the player does something
unexpected like bounce this mushroom off the
side of the screen.
This I think is the big pitfall of designing
by obscuring information, it can be incredibly
difficult for players to recover once they’ve
lost the thread of uncovering new things,
because most of the time, these discoveries
build on each other.
As cool as XCOM’S gating of info through
research was, for example, they removed it
in the sequel because it just felt bad to
get iced by an enemy you know nothing about.
I think for this reason, it’s important
for any game that focuses on obscurative design
to equip players with a foundational level
of knowledge that they can then build from
themselves.
Sometimes games just need to sit us down and
tell us what to do or what’s going on.
For all the breathless praise the half life
games get for their invisible and subtle tutorials,
there are several bits where those games lock
you in a room until you’ve been fed all
the info the game thinks you need.
People quite rightly love to go on about how
Ravenholm is excellent at teaching you gravity
gun combat with zero hard reminders or popups,
but it comes directly after this section in
the ruins of black mesa where Alyx runs you
through all the controls for the gravity gun.
So when this dumb zombie walks in front of
youw hilst you’re carrying a sawblade, you’ve
got an existing reservoir of knowledge to
draw from the game made a point of giving
you.Halflife’s more adventurous design like
the famous physics seesaw, or Half life Alyx’s
jeff chapter only work because the game set
up a baseline level of knowledge beforehand,
confident that you’ll be able to iterate
on it later on.
Tunic too fixes this problem by having some
of its incomprehensible parisian scrawls replaced
by a regular human language when it really
needs you to know something.
It’d be difficult for you to figure out
organically that you take more damage when
you’re out of stamina, so the game just
tells you - and most of the controls are either
in english or are easy to work out thanks
to the graphics.
This goes a long way towards giving players
a consistent level of knowledge to build from,
rather than them having to work out how to
swing a sword from scratch.
However, Tunic isn’t perfect here, in spite
of the english helping players out, many people
I spoke to about the game ran into at least
one comprehension roadblock during their playthrough,
in spite of the manual’s help.
In particular, many players had issues learning
how to level up meaning that they ended up
going up against some pretty tricky bosses
waaay underpowered compared to what they should
be.
What happened to some anonymous people is
that they took a look at the page that explains
levelling, tried to level up and upon seeing
that nothing happened when they moused over
these items mentioned in the manual, promptly
forgot about the mechanic because as it turns
out you can only level up at these shrines.
By the way, this is why those Metroidvanias
I mentioned earlier teach you stuff immediately,
people are very forgetful.
These alleged people may have then figured
out where to level up, only for them to get
confused again because they thought this dialogue
was for selling unwanted upgrade items rather
than using them.
I must stress that this person isn’t me,
I’m very clever.
I didn’t also spend five minutes wondering
why a stick couldn’t chop down bushes.
This hypothetical situation that in no way
happened to me, does present an interesting
question though, in a game all about discovery,
you might not even know if you’ve missed
crucial information, so how can a game create
a safety net for players who missed crucial
information without also destroying the discovery-based
fun?
After all If tunic told me how to level up
after 20 deaths, I’d just sort of feel frustrated,
not thrilled to discover something.
Well, the simple answer is… that it can’t!
No game can account for the sheer variance
of possible experiences and interpretations
that a player can have, and Tunic knows it.
Why?
Because you’re not the first person to go
on this adventure.
In Tunic’s instruction manual, you can find
pen and pencil notes made about some of its
various mysteries from a mysterious previous
player that can really help figuring out some
of its trickier puzzles - like this one that
tells you what some seemingly useless trinkets
do, where some traps are in a dungeon and
even help decoding its language which yes,
isn’t just nonsense it’s a semi real language
oh my god.
When all else fails, the best way to supplement
your knowledge is to ask someone else, you
know that big puzzle I smugly showed off at
the start of the video, I only knew what to
do because I got stuck, asked someone and
they gave me just enough help to get going
again.
Tunic’s little helper scrawls are its way
of subtly communicating to the player that
this kind of social, collaborative play is
all a part of the intended experience.
Because everyone will experience Tunic’s
many mysteries differently, there’s no way
the game can communicate completely clearly
to everyone.
So by encouraging players to work together,
and give each other enough of a helping hand
to figure out stuff themselves, players still
get all the fun of uncovering that hidden
information, whilst still being able to progress
And without having the gameplay ruined by
a spoilerific walkthrough.
Of course, Many games with a social element
use player-lead help to maintain their mysteries
whilst ensuring people don’t get stuck.
In soulslike games people can help each other
with the signs, in journey, you can work together
with your partner to navigate, and in Death
Stranding, you can see useful pathways left
by other players.
And look at minecraft, for many years that
game had no tutorial whatsoever and punching
trees to get wood wasn’t the genre staple
it is now.
Instead of dooming the game to obscurity,
this opaqueness created a thriving community
of people all helping each other out and a
cottage industry of youtubers teaching people
how to play the game.
Though it is worth mentioning that minecraft’s
total lack of a tutorial was dumb and the
very much optional one that got added in years
after release is much better.
For too long, we’ve approached knowledge
in games like an all or nothing, that either
we have to know everything so that we can
play perfectly, or nothing so as to keep our
brains pristine and spoiler free.
But I think as Tunic and games like it show,
just enough information to intrigue and inform
can actually enhance the discovery and mystery
experience, rather than harm it, and if you’ve
got a friend on hand to carefully calibrate
what kind of clues you can get, then that’s
even better.
Like everything, information as a challenge
vector is a balancing act.
Too much info and you cheapen the player’s
discoveries, too little and they just get
confused and angry.
Hopefully my careful nudging of you in the
right direction will make your future playthrough
of Tunic a little bit smoother - and if you
think I have ruined it, well why don’t tell
me about it in the comments, several ideally
- I really hate it when you artificially boost
my engagement metrics, oh no!
Woe is me!
Anything but that!
Hello one and all and welcome to the after
the video segment.
Wow this was… another long one, sorry.
But it’s all going to be worth it because
this is the part of each video where I do
some special shoutouts, first and foremost
to a cool internet thing.
This time it’s Skyehoppers, a very good
youtube channel I’ve actually had on my
big list of shoutouts for like, six months
and sort of forgot about and that’s a shame
because he’s great!
Skyehoppers does great coverage of really
thoughtful takes on a lot of very nuanced
topics we don’t tend to think about, like
the ethics of various categories of speedruns
for the same game, or the… weirdly coherent
environmental themes of super mario sunshine
- did you know that game is all about the
environmental and ecological effects of the
tourism industry?
I didn’t, but now I do!
Go watch Skyehopper! he’s great!
Some people who are also great are my lovely
lovely patrons, who to this day put up with
me and my nonsense because they love supporting
independent sponsor-free content on youtube.
In return, they get early access to videos,
behind the scenes stuff and even bonus content
for every video that never gets released to
the public!
Oooo!
Supporting on patreon is far more efficient
than supporting on youtube, not only is one
dollar of support on patreon worth thousands
of youtube views, I get a much higher proportion
of the money that way so I can buy more crisps
- I mean, video production stuff.
But the real incentive to become a patron
is to get a special shoutout, five dollars
a month gets you in the written credits, and
$10 a month gets your name read out, by me,
at the end of every video, like these fine
people: who are
Andrew Lubrano
Alge
Aseran
Björn Kähler
Brennan Spaulding
Brian Notarianni
Constantin Amend
Corey Girard
Cosmix360
Daniel Mettjes
David Setser
Derk-Jan Karrenbeld
Dotwo
Diggydog
Digletteer
Ecton
Edward Franklin Woods
Eugene Bulkin
Gazkul
Grétar Hannesson
Jacob Dylan Riddle
János Fekete
Joey Bruneau
Jordan Gear
Jorge Araya Navarro
Lee Berman
Lucas Slack
Macewindow54
Max Philippov
NWDD
Nate Graff
Patrick Rhomberg
Pet Pumpkin
Peter D. Tomasic
Philby The Bilby
Phoenix Thurisaz
Porchinski
Rrajigar
Rederdex
RegalRegex
ReysDad
Sheldon Hearn
Simon Jakobsen
Steve Riley
Strategia in Ultima
Theforbiddenshrimp
Tyler Duncan
WhimsicalWisp
Zach Grendel
Chao
Okay thanks for watching and I’ll see you
in the next video, byebye!
