The main focus here is how to interpret
the advice that you get on level design
as a game designer or a solo developer
because so much of the level design
content out there is not presented in
the context of you are making an indie
game and you've made the game yourself
and now you need to make the levels
yourself. It is much more along the
lines of preparing you to become a level
designer at AAA studio or something like
that. and that's not very helpful for
this channel or the audience of this
channel. So yeah, I'll be talking about
how to approach level design in your
games. So as an indie developer, you're
going to need to do these kind of
things. You need to experiment with your
game to establish what the level design
requirements are in the first place
before you do too much level design. Um,
you need to work out a tople content
plan for your game's levels. And I'll
give you an example of that that is in
another YouTube talk cuz I think it's
one of the best examples I've seen of
someone talking about level design in
the context of like being a solo
developer and making their own game. And
you need to sort of establish a strategy
for sort of how what what you're making
in in which order. These are all of the
sorts of things that you need to think
about as an indie developer. Side note
before we start, although you know
everything I've just said about how
indie developers have to do everything,
there are still plenty of places where
you can practice level design without
making a whole game. I don't know if you
also follow Steve Lee, who is a level
designer who has a fantastic YouTube
channel. And quite frankly, his channel
is one of the reasons why I didn't make
this talk just be a bunch of level
design tips because why get them from me
when you can get them from a proper
level designer. He talks about this
quite a lot on his channel. If you go
back 20 years or so ago, a lot of us got
into level design or even general game
design through editors for games. I did
a little bit of programming when I was a
kid, but a lot of what I did while I was
a teenager was using the Warcraft 3
editor, uh, using editors for games like
HalfLife and Juke Nukem and stuff like
that. And I would say the majority of
what I did that contributed to me
becoming a game designer later on was
level design. And within that, I would
try and bend the rules of the game. You
know, I would make uh Warcraft levels
that were different genres of game and
stuff like that. And that's how we got
games like Dota was people being
experimental and doing game design with
that level editor. Fast forward to like
2 or 3 years ago, I was working at a
studio that made Roblox experiences,
that made Fortnite experiences. You
don't need to actually use a
conventional game engine or make a whole
game to practice level design. There are
loads of people who have jobs in design
that aren't even level designers anymore
that are like general game developers or
something like that that started off in
these engines. These are common problems
with level design content. And Dark Dax,
sorry to pick on you. You have a very
well produced channel. You're very
entertaining. Your videos are very well
edited edited and by and large you know
what you're talking about. But this
video, for example, is not about level
design. It is a video that is about
environmental art. and the technical
aspects of environmental art. It's about
things like occlusion culling and uh not
loading in things when they're behind
doors. These 12 level design tips to
optimize your indie game. They're very
good tips, but they are not level design
because a lot of us when we first come
to game development, we need to learn
the technicals. We have this
misinformation about what design is.
Generally, people think that game design
is technically building something in a
game engine. And this video is an
example of that applied to level design.
They think level design is putting the
things in the in the level editor or in
the game engine. And it's not really,
especially when it comes to the kind of
art side of stuff. Level design is about
the functionality in the gameplay. Art
is about making it coherent, attractive.
We've got an example of what some
environmental art is over here. We've
got an example of level design over
here. And the point of this distinction
that we make between doing an art stage
and a grayboxing stage, the point of the
process is to be methodical so that you
don't create problems for yourself later
on. If you make this environment and you
beautify it before you've play tested it
thoroughly, any kind of changes you need
to make to that environment to move
things around later on are going to
become much more difficult because
you're dealing with way more objects.
You're just making your work harder for
yourself in order to iterate on this
later on if you need to change it. One
of the most important rules in game
development is that you want to keep
your iteration cycles as short as
possible. So, anything that you do in
your project that slows you down
changing things and and improving them
in some way because you know either
you've got an emotional attachment to
the thing and you don't want to change
it or there's you've just added more
objects and you need to physically move
them. Whatever it is, anything that
slows down your iteration process before
you've got to the point where you know
that the game is good and you are going
to continue working on it is a problem.
And that's a general game development
principle. And the the kind of gray
boxing process is just that principle
applied to level design. This is the
kind of response that some of you are
likely to be feeling to all of this is
that you know I have to do everything
myself. I'm a solo developer or I'm in a
small team. So there's no separation
between these things. There's no
separation between level design and
environmental art because when you're
working on your own, you have to do
everything. There's a really good talk
by Lost Relic Games. Here he basically
just talks about exactly what I've been
describing what happened to him when he
put too much effort into the specifics
of levels too early on and then had to
go back and do everything again. There
are also reasons why we do this. You
need to work out the art style for your
game and the pipelines anyway. You need
to work out what a tree looks like. You
need to work out what a rock looks like.
So, why not put it in a level? This is
the kind of attitude that lots of us
will have. And also, the other thing is
that it's rewarding and keeps you
motivated. This is not talked about so
much, but it is very, very important for
developers that are working alone,
developers that don't have a manager or
a producer breathing down their neck.
You have to do things that keep you
motivated. Be wary of what the balance
is of things you're doing because
they're enjoyable and things you're
doing for the benefit of the project. So
the way I try to work when I'm building
one of my own games is maybe on like a
2:1 or a 3:1 ratio of two or three
things that the game needs and one thing
that you're doing just for fun. But if
that thing you're doing just for fun is
causing these other problems, like you
know, you're prematurely polishing the
thing and you're making a mess for
yourself later on, then maybe maybe do
something else for fun. Any game is a
combination
of these two forces. It requires messy
creative experimentation and it requires
strategic structured approaches. A game
that is all massive creative
experimentation
will probably never get finished. And if
it does get finished, it might end up
being a total mess. And a game that is
all strategic, structured approaches
with none of the none of this messy
creative stuff is likely to be dull,
boring, have nothing unique about it,
and just be a copy clone of something
else. The good news is that we already
have strategies for these sorts of
things. There is a concept in sort of
level and environment design called
beautiful corners. You've been making
everything in gray box. Yeah. You've
been making the functional prototype of
the game. You've been making things in
gray box. Maybe you've got some concept
art. And then the beautiful corner is
like one tiny bit of the game. It's like
a microvertical slice. If I just go into
this one room in this one level, there's
like a an art prototype of what the
final game should look like, right? That
is a thing that already exists in the
games industry. That is a a widely
practiced thing that we can incorporate
into our own games. We can make a
certain area that is for testing the
thing. a very structured approach to
game development has this and and it's
about controlled mess, right? We get
this quote from John Romero where he
says, "Finish your first level last." We
also know that this was how Mario was
designed. So, world one in Mario was the
last thing they built. It's kind of
presented as like a wise quote, but it
is also just generally how sensible
people design their games a lot of the
time. make the middle of the game and
then make the things earlier on later on
once you know what you need to on board
people into. This is just a kind of very
established practice, very established
approach. Ed Key uh made a mobile game
called Hangline and has this really good
talk on GDC. This graph you can see on
the left here is what I would expect to
see in the planning of any game with
lots of levels. the environment down
here on the left. So, this is kind of
your art variations. We've got a sand,
warm, cool, warm, sand, cool. This is
the stuff that stops your game looking
visually boring as you cuz so because
you can move through different
environments. We've got a general level
theme of like what is the dominant thing
happening in this level. We've got the
rising of difficulty here and then we've
got different features or gameplay
mechanics that exist in the different
levels. He's planned the entire thing
out in terms of what is going to be in
all of these things and that gives you a
sense of like the entire flow of the
game in terms of going from one level to
the next and making sure it's varied and
stuff like this. This is a very system
systematic approach to how you decide
what levels to make. I'm going to take
you through John Romero's rules for
making Doom levels. And what I want you
to take away from this is not John
Romero's rules for creating Doom levels
are levels you should use in all level
design. Most of the time if you see John
Romero's rules for level design
presented to you on the internet. John
Romero made Doom and Doom's really good
so follow his rules. That is not what
I'm doing here. Instead, I'm trying to
show you that being a game designer and
making levels, there is a process there
of determining what your own internal
rules are for how your levels are made.
And a couple of these are about art and
technical art, and we'll go into why
that is in a minute. So, number one,
change floor height when changing floor
textures. You remember old FPS's, very
abstract, uh quite hard to see things if
you don't pay attention to this kind of
visual stuff. Number two, use special
border textures between wall segments
and doorways so that basically so we can
see the changes and we can see the
geometry of the level properly. Uh be
strict about texture alignment. This is
more of a housekeeping thing but here in
like in Doom he's talking about uh
basically it looks a bit crap if the
textures aren't aligned. The the kind of
uh exception to this rule would be if
you want to highlight slightly highlight
a secret door. So a secret door you
would unalign the textures slightly so
that players can there's a tell there.
There's a there's a way of knowing that
there's a there's a thing there that you
can you can unhide. Use contrast
everywhere. Light rooms versus dark
rooms. Open versus cramped rooms. This
is level design advice that still gets
repeated today uh and is still very very
common and we'll think about why it is
in a minute. Uh number five, if a player
can see outside, they should be able to
get there. This feels more like a almost
like a professional pride thing of like
we don't want to create anything fake in
our level. If you can see it, you can
you can go there. Have several secret
areas on every level. Make the level
flow so the player will revisit areas to
give a better understanding of it as a
3D space. Create easily recognizable
landmarks in several places for easier
navigation. Like I say, I'm not
presenting these to you as universal
rules of level design. Every time you go
out there and you seek advice or you
seek some sort of guidelines on how to
make levels, how to approach that
information in future because I'm not a
level designer. I have done level
design. Um, but I it's not my specialism
and you are going to go out there and
you're going to pick up lots of
different information from lots of
different talks and you need to have
approach to how you process that
information because ultimately if you're
working on your own game and you're on
your own, you're the leader there and
you need to behave like a leader and not
a follower. And that's ultimately what
being a design lead is about. It's about
doing what John Romero is doing here and
sort of defining the rules of the
project so that the project can be
consistent and the project can make
sense. These rules that we get from
John, if we think about like what design
goals do they achieve? Well, some of
them relate to making the player feel a
sense of achievement and feel skillful.
Some of them are to do with legibility
and readability, right? which is why a
lot of the art things that he talks
about are still game design things
rather than art things p per se because
they're to do with making sure you can
navigate. Uh there's interest versus
boredom giving moments of surprise,
delight, and that kind of stuff. And
then the story and world building, which
is very thin in Doom, but we can still
think about some of his rules in terms
of this. The rules of your game design,
of which your level design is part of,
should have player experience goals.
You're doing a thing to make people feel
a certain way, right? You're not just
doing it because John Romero says so or
because I say so or because Steve Lee
says so. You're doing it because it
achieves a particular player experience
goal. Right? People sometimes want me to
kind of give them universal rules of
thumb for game design and say always do
this or never do this and and sometimes
that's down to educational background.
Uh, some people never get to go into an
educational environment where they're
told to have their own opinions about
stuff. Some people's entire experience
of being educated is being told things,
being told what to think, being told the
rules of something and expected to
follow them. But that is not how art and
design work. And it it's not even how
like something like computer science or
engineering works. You have to have an
approach. You have to have your own
opinion about things. Be the person who
makes the rules for your project rather
than following other rules. It can be
very helpful to constrain yourself with
rules, but you sort of still need to
understand why you're putting them in
place. So, there are no universal rules
to game design. There are universally
understood truths of human psychology,
how humans think and how they perceive
things. And when we talk about game
design or level design and we talk about
good practice, we're usually talking
about those things. The only universal
truths of game design are to do with
human psychology and behavior. So when
it comes to flow, this idea that players
flow like water, it means they will try
and go into every area of the level, but
they don't turn 90° angles as they do
that. They move like a car. They sort of
twist and turn like that, right? It's
it's almost like a version of loss
aversion, right? We want to check out
every nook and cranny. We don't want to
miss out on an opportunity to find a
particular treasure or a secret or
something like that. And that creates
this behavior of how we move around the
space, right? So, it's a thing of how we
move around space that is driven by
other behaviors in the game. If we had a
game that had no collectibles, nothing
to find, we might not move in this
waterlike flow-like way, but we try and
find every vantage point in the level
and every corner of the game because we
think there might be something there. If
the game teaches people that there's
never something there, they will stop
behaving like this. Right? This is where
it starts to get really uh complex as
well is that as a solo developer, you
are going to be dealing with the fact
that level design is all of these things
or that a level is all of these things.
A level in your game is a place, right?
People perceive it as a place like a
simulation of a place in a world. It's
also an experience. So what I mean by
this is it is meant to give you emotions
in a sequence, right? Which stem from
things like there is a piece of combat,
then there is a big silent area between
uh encounters and then there is another
encounter and then there is a puzzle.
Like all of this kind of structuring of
activities for the player to do. A level
should have a goal, right? Players
should know what they're trying to do
when they go into a level. They're
trying to get to that landmark or
they're trying to flee the enemies.
That's a classic Half-Life one. They're
trying to flee the enemies and
the goal should be obvious, but you
sometimes hide the goal, right? So,
there's a landmark and as I'm working my
way towards the landmark, we hide it and
you lose the landmark for a little bit
and then you find it again and you feel
relief and then you lose the landmark
again and then you find it again and you
feel relief. Um that's the kind of thing
that you have to think about when you're
thinking about your level as an
experience uh rather than just like a
place with some art in it, you know. And
then the last point is that you know
like all game design is that what you
are creating is a language. So if the
thing is inconsistent with itself or if
it doesn't follow enough conventions of
what people are used to from game design
or from level design, then it will
confuse people. Right? The intention of
this slide is really to empathize with
you if you're working on your own or in
a very small team is that this is the
challenges that is in front of you when
you sit down to do any sort of level
design. And one of the reasons why we
tend to are on the side of making sort
of relatively abstract sci-fi and
dungeon based fantasy and stuff. We
don't have to think about how this place
functions as a representation of a real
world. We don't have to think about
where the toilet is in the dungeon. we
don't have to think about where the HR
department works in the spaceship and
stuff like that. That's one of the
reasons why certain genres are just more
practical for a game developer because
we can kind of rule this out. But even
then, you have to think of your level as
a kind of series of experiences that are
structured in a particular way and as a
language that players need to understand
because you're usually going to be
expecting players to do the same thing
over and over again. And if you break
the pattern in ways that is kind of
frustrating or confusing, then you're
upsetting people. Here we've got some
examples of how a level designer
approaches stairs. I'm not showing you
this to show you how to do stairs. I'm
showing it to you to show you how much
thought goes into stairs when you're
designing levels. So in this example,
you go up there and you go up there and
you're always sort of going into the new
section blind. So as you run down the
stairs, you enter the new room and you
see everything. Whereas what's happening
here in this last room when I come into
it, I don't go down the stairs until
I've used this vantage point. Right? So
if we look at the difference between
here and here, this is you just run
blind into the room as you come down the
stairs. This is you come into the room
and then you have the option to go down
the stairs or to use the vantage point
to look around. This is just an example
of like how many points of consideration
there are in something as simple as how
do I use stairs in my game? How do we
make it so that you can see stairs when
you're approaching them? Well, it can be
hard to see them from a distance. So, we
want to telegraph them up front. We want
to have them sticking out a little bit
like these ladders or these stairs here.
Again, you're kind of creating your own
set of internal rules of how you use an
element. Coming back to the general
point of this talk, whenever you see
this kind of stuff, like a tip or a set
of rules for something in in level
design, it's really helpful. absorb it,
use it, but remember that on your game,
you're probably the lead programmer and
the lead level designer and all this
thing. And that means that your job is
to think like the person who made this
guide. Your job is to think like John
Romero when he was making his list of
eight rules for level design. Your job
is to come up with the rules of your
game so that your game can be consistent
and easy for people to understand. And I
appreciate you all and thank you for for
joining and uh listening to me ramble
about these things. And remember,
one day you'll make something good.
Maybe
[Music]
Heat. Hey, Heat.
[Music]
