Hey, my name's Mark.
Last year I released Mind Over Magnet on Steam.
After years of wanting to make and release
my very own video game - I finally did it.
But, I'll admit, I made a
few mistakes along the way.
And my biggest screw up was not having a firm
understanding of the indie
game production pipeline.
Basically - what you should do, and when.
This meant that development took
way longer than it should have.
It caused me to have to re-do loads of content.
And it ultimately meant that the game
just wasn't as good as it could have been.
So it's time to learn from my mistakes.
This is a new series where I'll be
taking you through the entire indie
game development process - from the initial
concept, through prototyping, planning,
production, and playtesting - and all the way to
releasing your game on a storefront like Steam.
I'll be taking on board what
I got right when making Mind
Over Magnet - as well as what I totally messed up.
I'll share the process used
by other, much better games.
And I'll invite on expert guests who can add
their own perspective to the conversation.
So you won't learn how how to
code, or how to tune a good jump,
or how to design a level - but you
will learn the underlying structure
that you should follow if you want to actually
finish a game, sometime within your lifetime.
So this is Game Dev 101.
And this is episode one - the idea.
Okay. So every game starts with an idea.
An initial spark of inspiration that
will eventually lead to the
creation of a finished game.
But where do game ideas come from?
Well - for this video I investigated the origin
story of some of the world's greatest indie games
to find the source of that inspiration,
and give you some solid starting points.
But that's only half the story.
Because we also need to make sure
that the idea is worth pursuing.
So I also spoke to an expert
game designer behind three
successful indie games to find
out how he evaluates game ideas.
Sound good? Okay.
Then let's get started.
So, I think there are four main
ways to come up with game ideas.
And we'll start with this one...
yeah, that's right.
We can take an existing game and use that as
a jumping off point to make something new.
For instance, we could take a game and
move it into another perspective - like
how Satisfactory began with the idea
to move Factorio into first-person.
Or we could shift a game into a
different theme or context - like
how Subnautica's initial pitch
was Minecraft, but underwater.
We could move a game into a
different medium - Among Us,
famously, is based on real-world
social games like Werewolf.
Or we could bring a game back from
the dead - Stardew Valley was made
simply because designer Eric Barone
thought the Harvest Moon series had
gotten "progressively worse" since the PS1,
and was in desperate need of a better game.
Of course, none of these games are simply
reskinned clones of those existing titles.
They might use an existing game as a jumping
off point, but then they'll get to explore the
unique design space that comes from changing
the perspective, world, medium, or whatever.
A game will also change when fed through your
unique perspective and set of influences.
So, check this out: these are games made
by the Japanese indie developer Ikiki.
And they were particularly influential on
the designer Jonatan Söderström - who made,
basically, his own version of
Hakaiman - and never released it.
But when Jonatan teamed up with the
musician and artist Dennis Wedin,
Wedin saw that unfinished prototype
and wanted to make it into a full game.
And he was able to filter
it through his unique vibe,
vision, and set of influences
- which lead to Hotline Miami.
And look - Hotline Miami is
obviously inspired by Ikiki's games.
But it also feels completely
separate, thanks to that unique style.
And then, in turn, Hotline Miami went on
to inspire a whole generation of angry,
violent, lightning-fast indie games.
Because that's the thing - every
game is based on what came before.
Minecraft is based on Zach Barth's
blocky sandbox game Infiniminer.
Vampire Survivors is heavily inspired
by the Android game Magic Survival.
And Fortnite would be nothing without
the battle royale mode from PUBG.
So if the world's most successful
games are based on existing stuff,
then don't be afraid or embarrassed to
take influence from the games you love.
Dicey Dungeons creator Terry Cavanagh - who was
heavily inspired by the game Dream Quest - says
"Everything anyone *ever* makes
is inspired by what’s in their
head – what they’ve played or read or
encountered or thought a lot about.
Creation doesn’t happen in a vacuum –
everything is a remix! You start with
the ideas you love and obsess about, and go from
there to make something that’s uniquely your own."
Okay, so another good starting point is genre.
A genre is great because it can
act like a template or a recipe.
You basically get a set of ready-made mechanics
and conventions, and then you
can put your own spin on it.
But we can also go further than that.
For instance, a potent source
of inspiration is to find a
problem with a certain genre, and try to fix it.
Designer Ryan Clark felt like traditional
roguelikes were often unfair due
to a heavy reliance on randomness.
So he wanted to make a dungeon
crawler that was more about the
player's skill than the computer's RNG.
And that eventually led to the creation of the
catchy rhythm roguelike, Crypt of the Necrodancer.
That's also how my guest - game designer
and fellow YouTuber Jonas Tyroller,
invented the game Islanders,
alongside his university pals.
JONAS: I think for Islanders, it was very much
like a problem and solution kind
of way to think about it, right?
There was a problem that we identified
with city builders, which was like,
we just want to build beautiful cities, but
we don't want this ever increasing complexity.
And then basically Islanders was just our
solution to that problem that we spotted.
MARK: Another avenue to explore
is combining multiple genres.
As I showed in this video, Spelunky
designer Derek Yu loved platformers like
Super Mario - but didn't like repeating
the same levels over and over again.
And he loved roguelikes such as Nethack - but,
like with Ryan Clark, didn't dig the randomness.
So by taking elements from two different genres,
he could make something that would solve the
perceived problems of both types of game.
You could also add something brand new
to a genre - but there's just as much
design space to explore by taking something away.
Look at the Captain Toad levels in Super Mario
3D World - the character can't jump thanks to
his heavy backpack, so the traditional bouncy
platformer is transformed into something slower
and more methodical as a result.
In fact - we held an entire game jam around the
concept of picking a genre and then
taking out one of its core mechanics.
Though, more on game jams in a bit.
You could also take the
mechanics of an existing genre,
but swap out the metaphor, to
make something completely new.
For example, first-person shooters are basically
about lining up your crosshair with a target.
And for most of gaming's history we've used
the exact same metaphor - guns and enemies.
But what if you swapped the gun for
a camera? Well, you get Pokemon Snap.
Or changed the gun for a heavy duty pressure
washer? You get PowerWash Simulator.
The most important thing is to consider
genres in the loosest possible terms.
Don't get fixated on all of
the specific things a game
needs to have to "count" as a member of the genre.
Instead, boil the genre down to the absolute
DNA - and then build outwards from there.
Okay. So we've talked about getting ideas
from games and genres that already exist.
But maybe we want to make
something even more original.
Well, in this category let's talk about how
to make entirely new mechanics and systems.
Now, when it comes to making new gameplay,
one of the most fruitful sources of inspiration
is real world activities and experiences.
Like, game designer Lucas Pope had to travel a lot
between his home in Japan and his family in the
United States, and so had to go through passport
control more often than anyone would like to.
But as he watched the staff check his
passport he was inspired to make a game.
And so we get Papers, Please - a game
about checking for discrepancies between
different documents, and then choosing
whether to permit or reject a visitor.
And that's why it's important to have
experiences and interests outside of games.
Shigeru Miyamoto famously made Pikmin
after he got interested in gardening.
And Will Wright's games like SimCity and The Sims
are inspired by what he reads and learns about.
He says "I read a lot, I like learning
new things, and at some point I'll just
trip over a subject or some material
that I find particularly fascinating.
So it's not like I sit down and say, okay,
I'm going to come up with a new game idea.
It's more like I'm kind of just exploring,
browsing the world, then it's like oh,
maybe I can make a game out of this".
Another place to look for inspiration
is through the way we control games.
Designer Luke Muscat was thinking about
the different ways to interact with a
touchscreen and realised that a swipe with
a finger felt akin to slicing with a sword.
Combine that with a knife commercial
about chopping up pineapples and we
get the addictive iPhone time waster Fruit Ninja.
And when Nintendo added those squidgy analogue
shoulder buttons to the GameCube controller,
it immediately gave designer
Yoshiaki Koizumi an idea.
He said "Pressing them in, the sensation I was
most reminded of was the water pistols I used
to play with as a kid" - which, naturally,
led to the creation of Super Mario Sunshine.
You could also isolate one specific
mechanic or system from another game
and spin that off into something completely new.
Like how Braid began from the rewind
mechanic in Prince of Persia: Sands of Time.
Or how the developers at Yacht Club
Games loved the down thrust sword
attack from Zelda 2 on the NES, and
so decided to take that and spin an
entire game from it - leading to a game
about a knight with a powerful shovel.
In fact, this is exactly how I found the
concept for my game, Mind Over Magnet.
I really liked the magnetic glove power-up
in Zelda: Oracle of Seasons and thought that
would make for an interesting way to get
around a side-scrolling platforming level.
Now this type of game development - where you
start by looking for interesting ways to play,
is often referred to as bottom up.
You start with the mechanics - the rules,
the verbs, the what you dos - and then
add a story, theme, or aesthetic that makes sense.
It's a type of game development that's
often used at places like Nintendo.
Splatoon, for instance, was
invented as a game about big
tofu-like blocks who could hide in blobs of ink.
And it was only later that the
team started to think about the
design of the Inkling characters,
and the punky urban aesthetic.
But if there's bottom up,
there must also be top-down.
And so, yeah, that's also a way
to make a game - to start with
the experience and then pick
game mechanics that will fit.
It's an approach often - though
not always - taken by Hideo Kojima.
For instance, the starting point
of Death Stranding was merely a
mental image- of a beach lined with dead whales.
And also Norman Reedus is there. And he's naked.
Look, who's to judge what
happens in this man's head.
He's a genius!
But once Kojima has settled on the concept,
the characters, the music, and the vibe,
he can start to find game mechanics
that would make sense in this world.
So that's our fourth and final category for coming
up with game ideas - to start with the experience.
A excellent source of inspiration is the fantasy.
What sort of role do you want the player
to inhabit? The game FTL, for instance,
was all about making the player feel like the
commander of a spaceship in a hostile galaxy.
The game should capture the
thrill of exploring the universe,
and the panic of everything going wrong.
"All we cared about was making the
player feel like they were Captain
Picard yelling at engineers to get the
shields back online," says designer Jay Ma.
The rest of the game flowed from there.
Jonas's latest game - the smash hit
Thronefall - had a similar inception.
JONAS: So we settled on a fantasy, which was
making a game about building
and defending a tiny kingdom.
This power fantasy of being a ruler and building
your own little realm there, that works very well.
MARK: You can also start with a theme -
the game Spiritfarer came from a desire to
talk about the grave subject matter of death
and dying, but in a cozy and wholesome way.
Whereas Into the Breach was inspired by
superhero movies where the characters
cause untold destruction to the city
while fighting monsters and aliens.
Could they make a game about collateral damage?
Or maybe you could begin with a highly
personal experience - like That Dragon,
Cancer, which is an autobiographical game about
a couple grappling with the death of their son.
But note - a story isn't a game idea.
In fact, neither is a single game mechanic.
That's a fine starting point,
but you'll need to turn it into
something that can actually be played.
Now there are a few ways to think about this,
but here's one commonly used
structure to get you started.
Ask yourself...
in an individual level or scene, what is
the player's goal? What is the win state?
Then, what is pushing the player away from that
win state? What's getting in the way and stopping
them from succeeding? What is the obstacle?
What are those obstacles pushing the
player towards? What is the fail state?
And then - finally - what is the player doing
to overcome those obstacles and reach the
win state? What are the player's actions?
So if we consider, say, Crazy Taxi.
The win state is to make a certain amount of money
by delivering passengers to their destination.
The obstacle is a persistent ticking timer,
as well as other cars and scenery
that's getting in the way.
The fail state is running out of
time before making that money.
And so the actions are all about driving your taxi
- often in a fast, exciting, and reckless fashion.
Now that's a game idea we can work with.
Okay, so those are some of the most popular
and successful ways to find game ideas.
You can take an existing game and modify
it in some way to make it your own.
You can work in an established genre, and
then bend the rules to make something fresh.
You can find new gameplay mechanics and
then find an aesthetic that will match.
Or you start with the player's experience,
and pick game mechanics to suit.
But if you’re still feeling stuck, well, here are
10 rapid fire tips for coming up with game ideas.
Tip number one is to break games
down into their smallest elements.
Almost to the atomic level.
Create a periodic table of game
mechanics and systems in your mind.
This will make it easier to pick
and choose the ones you want,
and will help you mash up, change, and
remix these elements into new forms.
Tip two is to really
interrogate the games you play.
Implement a critic's mentality
and consider their pros and cons.
Because those flaws may be
opportunities for new games.
Tip three is to always challenge conventions.
Take everything that is expected of a game or a
genre and ask what would happen
if you flipped it on its head.
Designer Rob Daviau had the
realisation that every time you
played a board game you started afresh,
with no memory of the previous session.
Like the visitors in Cluedo were stuck
in a violent time loop of endless murder.
So what would happen if one game
actually did influence the next...
an idea which led to Risk Legacy, a
board game where you tear up cards
and permanently write on the board
to impact future play sessions.
Tip four is to play everything! Don't
get stuck playing games in a single
genre or medium because game ideas can
come from the most unlikely places.
If Toby Fox had only ever played JRPGs to
get ideas for Undertale, he would never
have made dodging enemy attacks into a madcap
bullet hell segment straight out of Touhou.
Tip five is to impose a limitation
or restriction on yourself.
Get away from that scary blank white page
and give yourself some boundaries to work in.
After making Sayonara Wild Hearts - a fast-paced,
rainbow-coloured music video of a game,
Simogo decided that the next game would be
slow, thoughtful, and, well, black and white.
Tip six is to enter game jams,
especially those with good themes.
Like this one! Or this one!
Not that one! This one!
These themes are both a limitation, and also
an interesting way to spark your imagination.
So take the Ludum Dare 54 theme "Limited Space".
Designer Tim Fitzrandolph asked himself
"What's something that normally takes a
lot of space that would be interesting
or unique if you gave it less space?".
This inspired him to take a racing game and
squish it down into the claustrophobic lanes of
a multistory car park - and led to the
creation of Parking Garage Rally Circuit.
Tip seven is to open your editor
and start noodling around.
Some of the best game ideas come out
of the development process itself,
as I explored in this video about
The Games That Designed Themselves.
As an example, A Short Hike started with
Adam Robinson-Yu just making a cute and
cozy little scene in Unity - and he liked
it so much he expanded it into a full game.
Tip eight is to surround
yourself with music and art.
A song may trigger neural pathways
in weird and wonderful ways.
Kyle Gabler was listening to the song
Tango Apasionado which gave him "this
drizzly vision of a town at sunset where everyone
was leaving their houses, carrying out chairs,
tables, and anything they could to build a
giant tower in the center of their city."
An idea which eventually turned into World of Goo.
Tip nine is to do literally anything else.
Sitting down with a pad of paper titled "game
ideas", or getting everyone together with a
whiteboard for a brainstorming session
is actually terrible for idea generation.
The science says you're much more
likely to have good ideas in the shower,
when your mind is left to wander, and
make interesting new neural connections.
So don't force it - just live your life.
And tip ten is to keep your idea small.
It might be tempting to try and
plan out the entire game on paper,
but that's usually a waste of time.
Think of a game idea as a seed
- something that you will grow
and cultivate throughout the
entire development process.
And besides, there's no point spending a tonne of
time on this idea when you might
not even make the game at all.
And that's because we need to ask...
Is this idea actually any good?
Okay, so you have an idea for a game.
In fact, you hopefully have many ideas for games!
But before you jump in and make one
of them your next multi-year project,
you should probably figure out
if this idea is worth pursuing.
I mean, you don't want to just make
the first idea you think of, right?
JONAS: For Will You Snail, I had
one idea and I just made the game.
And that was, I think a stupid thing to do.
And it was like playing Russian roulette, you
know, it's like, it can turn out okay, but you
don't really know because you haven't really
spent the time on properly testing the idea.
MARK: So instead, we need to
ask ourselves a few questions.
Starting with...
Can you make it? And I mean you, specifically.
Every developer has different resources
- the main ones being time, staff,
budget, and expertise, or experience.
So the idea must be viable
with your unique set-up.
This can be hard to predict when you're a new
developer but Jonas does have some advice on this.
JONAS: If you can make the gameplay
prototype in one or two days,
then you can make the game in one or two years.
Sort of rough rule of thumb.
If the gameplay prototype alone
takes you two weeks to make,
then it's going to be a very long
project to actually finish the game.
MARK: You can also find ways to
reduce the scope of a game idea.
Firewatch was initially going to feature
other characters, like hikers on the trail.
But modelling, texturing, and animating 3D
characters was beyond the scope of a tiny indie
team like Campo Santo, and so the story was pushed
to happen exclusively over the walkie-talkie.
But beyond that, you should ask if you're
personally passionate about this idea.
You'll have to work on this idea for many
months or years so you better love it!
The next question is...
will this game stand out?
Because, look - this game idea will lead to a game
that will launch into an ocean of other games.
Now if you just want to make a game for fun,
then you don't really have to worry about this.
But if you have any intention
of making money from this thing,
you should ask yourself if it has any
chance of standing out from the crowd.
One way to think about this is to
ask... does your game idea have a hook?
What's a hook?
Well, Ryan Clark - the Crypt of the NecroDancer
guy - defines a hook as "some interesting bit of
information about the game that compels
people to try it, or to discuss it".
And he gives the example of
Darkest Dungeon, which is a
game about managing the psychological
wellbeing of a dungeon crawling party.
That single sentence makes the
game sound interesting and unique.
To help with this, you can try to imagine...
if a website covered your game with a
news article, what would the headline be?
"Darkest Dungeon is a new dungeon crawler".
That's not going to get clicks.
"Darkest Dungeon is a dungeon
crawler inspired by Lovecraft".
Booooring.
"Darkest Dungeon is a Lovecraftian dungeon crawler
about the psychological toll of adventuring".
Woah, tell me more!
If you can't write a catchy headline for your
game idea, it probably doesn't have a hook.
But don't get too hung up on hooks.
For one thing, while it's great to focus
on finding something fresh and innovative,
there is such a thing as being too innovative.
Chris Zukowski from How to Market
a Game dot com says "You can’t go
overboard and wow them with a hook
that is so out there, so original,
so revolutionary that potential buyers
have no idea what your game even is.
If it sounds too risky to
them, they are going to pause,
say “looks cool but I don’t
trust it.” Then move on."
As way of example, check out the game
Arco - a Mesoamerican fantasy RPG with
bullet-hell...ish real-time turn-based combat.
Uh... did you get all that?
Sadly, the game flopped and developer
Franek says "Make New Stuff is fun advice
until you have to sell your game without
a target audience and you got rent to pay.
We made something new.
Our game has been well rated by
critics and players but it sold badly.
We'd get more sales copying an
already well established genre." Oof.
That's why Chris Z recommends
you also think about an anchor.
If a hook is something new and different,
an anchor is the factor that makes
your game feel familiar or safe.
That could be a well-known brand or a streamer's
recommendation - but in our case, it's a familiar
set of mechanics that help potential players
understand how your game will even be played.
I like the formula proposed by
Zachary Richman - a designer
who has won the GMTK Game Jam more than
once, thanks to his smart game concepts.
He suggests making a game that is
simple, with something unexpected.
A tower defence game... where you
can be hurt by your own bullets.
He says simple gets people in the
door, unexpected gets them hooked.
But also... there are simply other ways
to make people want to play your game.
And there are tonnes of highly successful games
that can't be boiled down to a
single catchy elevator pitch.
So this is why Jonas prefers to focus less
on hooks, and more on what he calls "appeal".
JONAS: So appeal is everything that draws
you into the game before you play the game.
So it's like the attraction force that
you feel when you see a screenshot,
when you see a short clip, when
you read the short description.
And all of the qualities from that that draw you
into the game is what I would define as appeal.
And I think there are different kinds of appeal.
There’s, for example, fantasy appeal.
Fantasy appeal makes you go “I want to be this”.
Whereas exploration appeal makes you go “I want to explore this”.
Whereas toy appeal makes you go
“I want to touch this, I want to interact with this”.
And you can see that different games
have different appeal strategies.
MARK: So, what other kinds
of appeal can you think of?
Perhaps... challenge appeal? Comedic
appeal? Or how about nostalgic appeal?
To help answer this, this question of does
your game have appeal, ask yourself...
how would you market it?
I know, I know - you haven't even
written a single line of code and
I want you to think about the Steam store page.
But that's not actually as dumb as it sounds.
For instance, here's Lucas
Pope, talking about game ideas.
LUCAS: So, something like Papers, Please
or even Obra Dinn, when I'm even thinking
about the idea, I'm thinking, how
could I express this in a trailer?
If it can't be expressed in a, if I can't
imagine right now a cool trailer for this,
then it's probably not worth pursuing.
MARK: Thinking about the trailer
forces you to ask... can I show the
world what makes this game idea
interesting and worth playing?
And Tom Francis, who just
launched Tactical Breach Wizards,
says "when you start a project you don't
necessarily spend a lot of time thinking
about the steam store assets you're going
to end up with, and maybe you should",
arguing that trying to figure out the game's name
and Steam capsule art is a great way of figuring
out if this game idea has a marketable proposition
before you start spending resources on it.
And then the final question to answer is...
is the game idea actually fun?
Because the truth is...
our brains are terrible video game simulators.
Almost every idea seems fun in our heads.
But once we actually make it we'll realise
that it's boring, that it's too complicated,
and that it has disastrous
unforeseen design problems.
So the only way to know for sure...
is to build a prototype.
So click here to watch a
video all about prototyping.
