Games are made of chains. Did you know that?
I bet you didn't. I bet you've been listening
to those nerds who tell you that games are made
out of loops. Well, they're not. They're made of
chains. Do you understand? Chains. Chains on our
hands, and our minds. Sorry, I got a bit carried
away there. I'm just so excited about chains.
You might have heard of the idea of a game loop.
When you do the same thing over and over and
over in a game, the most fundamental basic
type of loop is a reward and investment loop. I
kill a guy, I get some coins, I spend the coins,
I get a bigger sword, I kill another guy, he's got
more coins, and I do things over and over again.
Game loops are a helpful conceptual tool for us
to be able to look at a game and go, "Oh, yeah,
you do that over and over again, don't you?"
Despite how I started this video, we're not
really trying to cancel game loops. They're just a
theoretical tool. The thing about design theory is
it's a series of metaphors for things that don't
really exist. We can look at a game and we can see
certain types of shapes and patterns in the game
itself or the way it makes players behave and we
can describe them. We can say that's a loop and
that's a chain. Oh, that's interesting. Maybe we
can reproduce that when we make our own games.
but they don't really exist. It's kind of like
music. If someone understands musical notation,
they can write down notes or they can read notes
and they can say that note is an A. That note is
an F. That note is a Q. The music exists. We can
hear it. We can recognize it as music. But the
way of describing it is culturally specific and
it's arbitrary. Game design theory is like that.
is a series of metaphors to help you understand
the reception of the art when you listen to it or
play it and the creation of the art. Like what are
we trying to do when we make this thing? How have
other bits of art done it? Me. The problem with
game loops is game loops don't really get us to
an understanding of anything other than, oh yeah,
games are repetitive, aren't they? Do something
over and over again and then you play someone's
game and you go, oh well nice collecting coins,
but it would be good to have something to spend
them on. What you need is a game loop. Wow.
Feels like it's of limited insight. It can be
quite helpful to look at existing games and see
how their loops work. See how celebration and
ritual fit into those things. You know, think of
Dark Souls. It has a kind of negative celebration
around death. Both in terms of the way it's
announced when it happens and then how that
modifies your next run of Get Your Stuff Back. I
don't want to talk about loops anymore. I want to
talk about chains. Now, this would be a really
good place to have The Chain by Fleetwood Mac
playing, but I can't afford the license for that.
So, I'm going to do my own little cover version.
I think chains in games are interesting
because of how they map on to emotion.
And the the most simple chain that I can think
of that most people would probably think of if
you said a chain of actions in a game would
be like executing a combo in a fighting game.
When you commit to doing a specific set or
string of actions in a particular order,
what happens is every one that you successfully
complete raises the stakes about what's coming
next. If you're trying to complete five actions in
a row and you get the first or second one wrong,
you're going to feel a bit bummed out. Oh no. When
you're getting wrong on the fourth or fifth one,
that is when it starts to feel like an epic fail.
Oh, I almost had it. There is a emotional arc to
a chain. You're not button bashing. You're
trying to hit a very specific list of things
in a specific order. It creates this rising sense
of emotional investment with each thing you do.
This is not just relevant to trying to execute
a combo in a fighting game. There is an essay by
game designer Dan Cook. I will link it in the
description. You should go and read it. It is
about value chains. If you've got a economic chain
in a game, like you collect these things and you
use them for this. It's the what you use them for
that gives the collection meaning and makes you
feel something about it. So the the example that
Dan gives is picking up sticks is not inherently
fun. You can make it as fun as you can. You
can make it feel really toyike and they could
be really sparkly sticks or whatever, but it's
not an inherently fun activity. It's not enough
to carry a game. What makes the activity enjoyable
is what the player plans to do with the sticks and
how that fulfills the like core fantasy of the
game, the core emotional thing that the game is
pulling at. whether it's like building something
beautiful or some sort of utility value that the
thing that they're building has. Another really
good example of this would be there was a little
bit of crafting in Fallout 3 and then in Fallout
New Vegas there was a little bit more crafting
and then in Fallout 4 you're now like the mayor of
Boston and you need to rebuild Boston using twigs
and super glue. There are people that don't like
those base building mechanics. quite possible to
play the game while ignoring those mechanics.
But my experience of it was personally being
able to build stuff out of the junk in the game
changed everything. It meant that objects that
previously were just a piece of junk to be
collected and sold and maybe you would think
a little bit about like the cost to weight ratio
of different objects as you picked them up, they
were now imbued with a different sort of meaning
because now I'm trying to build the lighting for
my 1950s Hawaiian Aloha bar and I need to look out
for items that have uh copper wiring in them. So,
I'm learning which fans and telephones have copper
wiring in them. the destination of the chain that
we know we're working towards changes the feel
of engaging with mechanics earlier on because
knowing that I'm trying to rebuild Boston with
twigs and glue means that every time I go into
a place and I'm looting it, the decision space
of what do I pick up, what do I leave behind
is suddenly richer because I'm not just taking
every gun to sell at the merchant because that
has the best weight to cost ratio or something
like that. having a kind of forward destination
for these resources I'm collecting. The action of
collecting the stuff becomes more meaningful and
interesting and exciting to do because the player
understands what they are trying to achieve by
doing it. But there's another type of chain I want
to talk to you about. Spelunky has a chain in it
of interesting secrets that lead up to kind of
the proper ending of the game. It's not the only
game that's done this. Castlevania Symphony
of the Night had a similar thing. Basically,
in both games, you can do what you think is
completing the game. And then there's a hidden
better way of completing the game. In order to
do it, you'd have to stumble across this chain of
secrets or you'd have to read about it online or
something like that. I think that's cool. That's
a chain where the player doesn't really know it's
a chain. And I've been trying to incorporate some
of these into the game that I'm currently working
on. There are these fairies. They're reasonably
trivial to spawn, but the first few times
the player manages to spawn these fairies,
they're not actually going to know what triggered
it unless they read it on the internet. They won't
really know how they did it. And the fairies
will be part of a chain where if the player,
and by doing that, they'll have unlocked that and
then they'll feel really good about themselves.
But they'll probably encounter the fairies quite
a few times before they realize that they're part
of a chain. and that there is a very simple way
to start that chain and to spawn the fairies.
They just they'll be doing it by accident
to start off with. I have a similar plan
for this horrific mouth monster. This is going
to be the start of a chain. And if you feed it
a I think this type of design is interesting
in a systemic game like a rogike because the
player is doing lots and lots of runs of doing
the same thing and that vastly increases their
chance of just stumbling across the solution
to one of these things. It's kind of how the
chains work in Spalunky. It's how some of the
puzzle chains work in blueprints. I really,
really like that feeling of you walk past
something dozens of times before you realize
that it's significant and it's been under your
nose all this time and then you put the pieces
together and there's something really pleasing
about that. And I love the depth that that can add
to a game which has relatively simple controls.
The game I'm working on is just you jump around,
you can punch stuff, you can pick stuff up and
throw it. That's basically it. So, these kind of
mechanics where you have to spot an opportunity
and you have to spot what conditions spawn the
fairies. All of these kind of things are where
my game is getting its depth really. All right,
then. Keep your secrets. Look, guys, I know
that you love loops. You love loops. Love doing
the same thing over and over again, but you've
got to give chains a chance. You can get clear
chains where players know where they're going and
the the feeling of the chain is defined by the
player's motivation to build a particular thing.
Or you can get these weird secret chains where
the player feels smart because aha now I realized
that I was actually making the fairies spawn by
chains are cool and good. But you know what's
even better than chains? I I I actually don't
you know why I like chains and actually why I like
loops. I like visual spatial metaphors that help
people to understand interaction design because
without them game design would be really hard.
Thanks to everyone who supports this channel
via YouTube memberships and Patreon. If you like
this sort of thing, then give me some money.
If you can't afford to give me some money,
then just just say something nice cuz there's
going to be some dick below going, "Oh, this
doesn't tell me how to make six figures. I don't
care about game design." And thank you to everyone
who is supporting this channel and allowing me to
make almost UK minimum wage doing entertainment.
[Music]
