What is fun? Where does it come from? Why do
blondes have more of it? Biology can explain
to us how and why we've evolved to seek dopamine,
but that kind of scientific thinking can only get
us part of the way to understanding the role
of fun in game design. Engaging and grappling
with the concept of fun is essential to what
game designers do. But when we use the term on
its own without any qualifiers, it often just
leads to confusion. Human beings are a diverse
bunch and we don't all enjoy quite the same
things. In this video, I will explore a bunch
of different definitions and uses of the word
bun and think about what each one practically
means for us as game designers. And along the
way, I'll probably say the word fun so much that
it loses all meaning. Fun fun funny fun. Is this
hat fun? Is that fun? A big wheel? I don't know.
If you've ever looked for a book on fun by an
actual game developer, then chances are you've
already encountered Raph Koster's theory of fun
for game design. This is a book which came out
originally in 2004, authored by someone who had
then been a professional game designer for at
least a decade. At the time of writing, Koster's
most notable work had been on Ultima online,
which is a sort of Runescape, for really old
people. The titular theory in Koster's book,
is that humans experience fun as a reward for
learning and practicing new skills. Fun is the
emotional name we give to the sensation of
dopamine. We've evolved this kind of reward
system which is there to encourage us to
behave in ways which make us more likely
to survive and thrive in the big bad world.
This is what's at work every time we exercise
curiosity or take on a challenge. In the olden
days, we would have had to strategize and plan
ahead in order to well not die. And that's why
nowadays we play thinky games like this, this,
and this. We might also need to react quickly
to danger or go and look for berries. And that's
why nowadays we play games based on reaction
and situational awareness like this, this,
and this. To this day, games are usually still
about the thinky skills like strategy, puzzles,
and navigation, social skills like cooperation and
bluffing, or reactions and situational awareness.
All of this makes perfect sense, and Costa
leaves open the idea that in our current world,
there might be new problems worth exploring rather
than just making video games that are so clearly
tailored towards the evolutionary needs of this
handsome chap. There's nothing wrong with this
definition of fun, and I think for the more hard
science among you, it will probably do. It's very
common to hear people in the games industry talk
about reward loops involving dopamine. But where I
think this book falls down is in the second part
of the title. We get quite a solid idea of what
fun is, but we don't necessarily get a sense of
how you functionalize that as a game designer into
making games which are fun. And the thing that
I dislike most about Costa's book is just how
dismissive it is of types of pleasure that we get
from games which don't directly relate to learning
a new skill. And this includes things like the
enjoyment that you might get from being surprised
by something or being scared by something
or something comedic happening. There's also
the problem of general usage when you take a word
with a very broad way that it is used in everyday
life and try to make a very specific academic or
craft-based meaning for it, which then is so far
removed from how most people use it that it may
as well be a different word. You know, if you're
going to use the word fun exclusively to refer
to dopamine, then you might as well just use the
term dopamine in the first place. I know a lot of
you do anyway. You can't help yourself, you little
science nerds. Other ways that we can think about
fun tend to focus less on identifying specifically
what fun is and more on differentiating between
types of fun. Thinking of fun in terms of a
taxonomy has a lot more applications for game
development because if we're able to correctly
identify the type of fun a game is meant to
contain or produce, then we can start to make
design decisions which are more likely to intrigue
and engage the players of the specific game we're
making or fans of a specific genre. No game is for
everyone and it might be that a mechanic which is
really fun in one context is just downright boring
or annoying in another. And in the back end of
this video, I'm going to talk about a process
for identifying specific types of fun you want
your game to contain or produce and then using
those as pillars for the overall design. I would
encourage you to think of fun more in terms of
a varied and diverse set of things. kind of like
different flavors or ingredients in a cuisine or
notes in a musical scale or colors in a palette.
[Music] Our first taxonomy of fun was a little
triplet coined by geologist and mountaineer Dr.
to Raina Newbury back in 1985, just 3 years
after the release of ET for the Atari 2600,
a game which to this day is still broadly
considered to be the best computer game
ever developed. Newbury's three types of fun
include two which are fun, and confusingly,
one which isn't. Type one fun is enjoyable when
you do it, like eating a meal or playing on
your Atari 2600. It's the definition of fun we'd
normally associate with simple terms like pleasure
and enjoyment. Type two fun is fun that feels fun
to remember because of the associated feelings of
achievement, but might not have been fun while you
were doing it. It usually involves some degree of
exertion or peril, either physical or or mental,
like climbing a mountain or performing in front
of people. This is the type of fun that maps
more clearly onto that evolutionary model of
why we experience fun. Type three fun is a sort of
sarcastic, darkly humorous term for things which
are probably meant to be fun but end up not
being. It's fun gone wrong. At first glance,
type 3 fun doesn't seem all that relevant to
game design until you start thinking about
things like rage games, which are designed to be
deliberately frustrating. Extreme horror games,
which often give us situations we never
want to be in again, and experimental games,
which are genuinely physically painful to
play, like the 2001 Pain Station, which was
developed by, you guessed it, art students in,
you guessed it, Germany. Oh my god, it's fire.
Michael Rucker, author of The Fun Habit, notes
that type three seems out of place in a taxonomy
of fun because, well, it's not really fun.
But then he quickly goes on to describe how
one person's type two could be another person's
type three, there are those among us who will
never try surfing because we just see it as
too dangerous and don't want to drown. Just
like there are people that really love Dark Souls
and there are other people that look at the amount
of grueling failure and repetition involved in
those games and think that's just not for me.
Now, Rucker isn't a game designer, but he does
kind of expand on the evolutionary theory of fun
that we get in Costa's book, focusing on things
we do as a community, which end up feeling fun,
which again might not be fun at the time
because they're grueling or exhausting or
scary or whatever. A big part of the fun of
games is bonding by either playing them with
other people, watching other people play them,
or talking about them after we've played them.
So whether you're berating your housemates for
their poor culinary performance in Overcooked,
memeing all over the floor in Elder Ring,
or co-authoring a massive wiki about some
obscure survival crafting game, you're doing
something pro-social. And this means that the
drugstore of your brain is once again open for
business and has more to offer you than just
dopamine. Games are also a site of social
interaction, whether direct or indirect,
and that can make things that are ostensibly not
very fun feel enjoyable and meaningful. [Music]
This book from 1961 is considered a foundational
text in game studies despite it being a field
which didn't really fully start to emerge until
the late 1990s. also not very gender inclusive,
but that's because in the 1960s we hadn't made any
games for women yet. Game studies is a branch of
academia mostly aligned with the humanities and
concerned with games, play, and players. Here
are Cowis's four types of play. He doesn't call
them fun because he was a French intellectual and
therefore didn't know the meaning of the word,
but they might as well be that. They are broad
categories of play and they give us a sense of
the diversity of enjoyment that humans seem to
get out of playing games. Aegon refers to games
of competition and skill. Aliyah refers to games
of luck and chance. Mimikree is where games offer
us an opportunity for role-playing and pretending.
And illinx is a fancy word for vertigo, which
refers to the pleasure we get from whooshy,
dizzying things like roller coasters and dancing
and getting drunk and falling over. They're still
kind of compelling categories. If anything, they
just go to illustrate how complex and rich the
video games we play today are. Consider the
differences between a turn-based role playing
game or an action RPG. In both types of game,
we're enjoying the mimicry of taking on the role
of a character and inhabiting a fictional world.
That is the mimicry element, and it's what makes
it a role- playinging game. But in an action RPG,
the Aegon element of trying to beat the game is
more related to vertigo of like moving the camera
around and manipulating a character in real time.
Whereas in a regular RPG, the skills involved are
more to do with strategy and planning. And ills
refers to things like moving the camera around
and being dazzled by VFX, which can occur in
both types of games. The simpler games that we had
before computers were invented were often based on
a single simple type of play. Nowadays, we're used
to having video games which tick multiple boxes
for the types of pleasure that they produce.
Even a digital card game like Hearthstone has
its fair share of things whooing and flying
around the screen. So, it's less a question
of which type of play are we experiencing and
more the ratios that are at work in each game.
Now, we don't need to use the specific archaic
terms that cowwir uses. Absolutely not encouraging
you to do that. But conceptually, it's still
useful to think through. Again, what I'm getting
at here is that it's good to think of fun as a
bunch of different things because fun is diverse.
[Music]
When I was at school and we studied cooking, we
used to do taste testing using spiderraphs which
looked a bit like this. You would have all these
different axes and you would map out things like
salt, sweetness, umami, bitterness. And this would
give you a pseudo objective way of comparing two
different meals or two different iterations
of the same meal. And I think what I'm trying
to encourage here is a similar way of thinking
about games and fun. A game usually can't push
in every direction at once. And you can make a
game with any combination of thrilling gambles,
meticulous strategy, lightning quick reactions,
and deep roleplay. But making a game that has
all of those things going at once and does them
well is really, really hard. You probably could
make a game that does all of those things, but it
would be horrifically expensive to include all of
the relevant features and polish. And as indie
developers, that's kind of your niche. Instead
of making a big bloated thing that needs to appeal
to half a million people to sell enough copies to
keep the studio a float, you can make something
with a much narrower and more focused appeal. And
that's what you should do. That's what successful
developers do. You might have heard of player
psychometrics. And these are models that look at
the tastes and motivations of different players,
usually within the same game. One of the most
famous sets of player psychometric profiles
comes from Richard Bartle's work in online
multiplayer games in the mid90s. Battle types
include achievers, explorers, socializers, and
killers. All of which are types that are still
relevant to most multiplayer games today. MMOs and
big openw world singleplayer games are examples of
game types which can offer a lot of flexibility in
the types of players that they attract and appeal
to. But as small-time indie developers, we often
have to be more focused. Maybe the game you're
making is just for socializers and achievers.
Maybe it's just for killers and explorers. Or
maybe it's even more focused on just one of those
types of motivation. The psychometric angle again
points us in the direction of thinking of fun
not as a single thing but as a set of possible
elements. Any type of enjoyment that a
player can derive from a game's design,
i.e. from the game's interactivity is a type of
fun. Some types of fun seem to go well together
and some not so well, just like ingredients
in cookery or colors in a palette in art.
When we view fun as a varied and diverse thing,
this is not necessarily at odds with dopamine,
our caveman brain drug reward for doing something
good. It just takes the emphasis off of explaining
why humans do fun things in general, and more
onto how we might make games which are fun in a
specific way, which is really important if you
want to make a game that anyone ever wants to
play. Whether we're learning reaction or strategy
skills required to win a competition, learning how
to judge odds in a gambling game, or acclimatizing
to role- playinging as a particular character,
there's still some sort of system at work, some
rules to learn, and a feeling of satisfaction as
we navigate and improve at these activities.
Even in a game of mimicry, where the roleplay
and the story elements are the strongest part,
we're still practicing skills like judgment. The
enjoyment I get from a game like Disco Allesium
or a visual novel largely comes from judging
characters and situations. Not something that we
normally associate with skill-based video games,
but a skill nonetheless. Dopamine. [Music]
There may be some scientific merit to a narrow
definition of fun. If we're trying to understand
play in the context of biology or sociology or
child development, but it doesn't really help us
to design for that, we probably need to go wider
identifying and acknowledging lots of different
types of fun so that we're able to hone in on
which type we are aiming for when we create a
game ourselves. It's often better to have a big
bag of tools that you don't need than to show up
to every job with just a hammer. even if you do
usually end up using the hammer. The 14 forms
of fun actually originate from a 2001 article
on gamedeveloper.com by French Canadian designer
and programmer Pierre Andre Garner. For Garner,
fun was a quality which exists in any activity
that we find fundamentally entertaining.
Application of an ability. Advancement.
Beauty. Creation. Comedy. Competition.
Discovery. [Music] Immersion. Intellectual
problem solving. Love. Physical activity. Power.
social interaction, thrill of danger. Now, some
of these are self-explanatory while others are
maybe a bit less obvious. I'm not going to go
into every form of fun in detail. You can look
at how they're defined in the article and
you can disagree with those definitions,
and I'll also post some other resources which
add even more forms of fun. The point I want
to make here is lists like this have much
more application to real game design because
they help us to focus on the qualities of games
and what makes one game different from another
because that is a central design question for
every game you make. Why would someone play
the game I'm making rather than something that
already exists that is quite similar to it? Game
design requires emotional literacy. We need to
be able to play a game, see how it makes us feel,
and then look at the set of mechanics, systems,
and the theme and artwork layered on those things
to be able to reverse engineer the game and
understand why it made us feel that way.
Now in the last section of this video I am going
to talk about how to use the 14 forms of fun or
any other list of types of fun as design pillars.
But in order to do that first we need to talk a
little bit about what design pillars are and what
they're not. Design pillars are a set of concepts
which hold up a design. The point of design
pillars is to provide a foundation for what
the game or experience is about and how it's meant
to make players feel. To put this into practice,
you would pick two or three terms describing the
type of fun you want players of your game to have.
Then, as you develop the game, you weigh up every
decision you make in relation to whether it fits
with these pillars. It's not just some kind of
wafty thing of writing a game design document and
saying this game is about beauty and sadness. It
is about giving you a set idea of what you should
and shouldn't include in your game. If you've
decided that you're making a game that is meant to
be about creation and beauty and players building
something lovely that they're proud of, then why
are you putting so many puzzles in? Design pillars
help a game to feel focused on a particular type
of experience, but they also help you to make
practical decisions about what to implement and
what not to implement. Design pillars are used
in various disciplines outside of games like
marketing, branding, architecture, product design.
And the important thing to understand is that they
are fundamentally about the end users emotions and
experience. This is an area where design pillars
are often mistaught in game development courses.
The design pillars for your video game should not
be things like the game genre or its art style.
Terms like third person shooter or low poly
3D. Those are not design pillars. They're simply
descriptions of a camera controller configuration
and how things look on a screen. Design pillars
are meant to describe how the end user of a
product should feel and what they should be made
to think about as they engage with it. Let's say
that instead of working on games, you're now an
interior designer. You might have a design pillar
like sophisticated. This might be something you've
chosen on your own or it could be something that's
come from your client. The goal of this design is
to make a sophisticated feeling space which makes
people feel sophisticated upon entering it. You
would then go off and explore specific styles like
the art deco of 1920s New York or 17th century
French maximalism as different ways of achieving
that feeling of sophistication. Likewise, someone
who designs kids playgrounds as part of a wildlife
park. They might make this tople decision that it
should be rustic and timeless and not too modern.
And that would lead to practical decisions to use
materials and processes which help to create that
feeling. The point of having design pillars is to
nail down the intention of the design early on,
how it's supposed to make people feel so
that you can make something which serves
its audience well. They also make it much easier
to make decisions mid development because you
can more easily throw away certain ideas which
don't support the core design pillars. This is
why if your game development is very mooddriven,
like you're making a cozy game or a horror game,
it's sometimes easier to make decisions about
what to include and what not to include because
you're already focused on players emotions. If you
were designing a drinking bottle, you wouldn't use
must hold liquid as a design pillar. That's just
a given of what a bottle is in the first place.
Just like jumping and avoiding danger are
given elements of making a platformer game.
That's just part of the original brief your boss
gives you when they ask you to produce a design.
Today we're going to design a new bottle or
car or platformer game. The overall form,
eg a thing which carries liquid, a four-w
wheeled vehicle, or a side view game where
you jump over holes are top level constraints of
the design, but they are not the design itself.
Sometimes game design pillars are to do with a
narrative theme instead. For example, in the 2018
God of War, the three pillars were exploration,
combat, and the father-son dynamic. Boy,
whatever you think about God of War, this leads to
a tight focused game where the gameplay elements
of exploration and combat are always working
to strengthen the narrative theme of father and
son bonding. Sometimes design pillars are broad
statements about how a game should be designed.
For example, when frictional games were working
on indie horror soma, they had game pillars like
everything is story and trust the player. Now,
those don't directly map onto our 14 forms of fun,
but you can already see how they relate to ideas
of fun like immersion and intellectual problem
solving. Those pillars ensured that S's puzzles
exist naturally within the game story and don't
feel like contrived escape room gimmicks. And it
also makes sense that a game that was so heavily
about atmosphere, environment, and uncovering what
happened here would have design pillars which is
so strongly focused on delivering a particular
type of environmental storytelling and puzzles.
Design pillars are a really helpful way of
making sure that you understand what you're
trying to make. If used properly, they can save
you a lot of time making decisions because you're
not constantly changing the basic idea of the
thing or what it's meant to achieve. Sometimes
the pillars we use in design are a little bit more
complicated than a single word label for a type of
fun. But that doesn't mean that those are not
a good place to start. The forms of fun aren't
the only possible game design pillars, but they
provide a very good start for thinking about it.
If you can pick two or three of them to orient
your current game project around, it will make
all future decision making easier because you
can evaluate every gameplay decision, every art
decision based on whether it aligns with those
chosen experience-based pillars. Sometimes the
genre we picks our design pillars for us. A horror
game is going to naturally lead more towards
immersion and the thrill of danger. But even in
that instance, thinking these things through more
openly and explicitly can help you to develop a
more nuanced perspective on the game you're making
and the balance of appeals. If you're making a
horror game, what is the particular flavor of
horror you're doing and how does it differ from
other types of horror? How much peril is there in
your horror game? Is it mostly about combat and
hiding? Or are there large portions of the game
that are more about being immersed in a particular
atmosphere and navigating the environment? And if
you're anything like me, you probably want to go
more down the God of War route where you have a
couple of pillars that are to do with gameplay
and interactivity and one that is more thematic
and story related. I personally can't stay
inspired to work on a game unless at least one
of my design pillars is something a bit more heavy
and thematic, even if it's just something in the
background of the world building. Kind of like how
Binding of Isaac is thematically about religious
family trauma. After all, we all know that
indie games are all secretly about depression.
Designing a game is mostly about caring what the
player is doing. the interactivity, the fun, and
often it's also about thinking about what you're
trying to make the player think about and feel,
the themes. And if you can care about both of
those things and put thought into those things,
you'll already be off to a better start than 90%
of the folks releasing games on Steam every day.
There's an introduction to a bunch of different
ways of defining fun in game design or choosing
not to define it because it's actually more useful
to focus on taxonomy rather than definition. Fun
is the term we use to define how it feels to learn
and master systems and mechanics. But there are
lots of different types of fun which appeal to
different player psychologies. It's often not
that helpful to think of fun as a single thing.
Although that's a perspective that is encouraged
when we think of fun purely in terms of dopamine.
It's probably better to think of fun as a pool of
elements with varying degrees of complimentariness
like ingredients in a cuisine, colors in a pallet
or notes in a musical scale. There are probably
more than one, three or 14 forms of fun. Like I
said, the map is not the territory. The point
is to think about the overall feeling a game
is giving us so that we can then understand how
the elements work together to get us there. So,
whatever game you're working on now, take a
look at the 14 forms of fun and some of the
other resources that I've left in the description
of this video, are there two or three which are
dominant in the game that you're currently making?
If there are five or six, which seem to be more
important than the others? Are there any forms of
fun that seem to be fighting for priority in your
game? And if they are, is that a problem? Or is it
leading you somewhere interesting? If you've been
making games for a long time and you think about
your entire career as a designer and developer,
are there forms of fun you naturally lean towards
and ones that you avoid? Some of you might even
come to the realization that you have been
trying to force yourself to work in genres
that you fundamentally don't understand the
appeal of to make forms of fun that you don't
understand and that you don't personally
think are fun. You wouldn't be the first
