The structure of this talk is going to
be I'll take you through a bunch of
things that you should probably think
about if you're making a game with
characters and dialogue in. And then
there's an exercise at the end that you
can take away and do which will help you
build up some skills in this area if you
don't already have them. So we're going
to go through a bit of theory. We're
going to go through some practical
considerations in this area when we talk
about characterization and dialogue and
then a little exercise at the end and
then kind of an open Q&A like like we
always do on a stream really. Um, and
we're also thinking about narrative
design here. So, if you haven't heard
this term before, it's a term that sort
of games writers have taken on in the
last sort of 10 or 20 years to help us
think about the relationship between
game design and writing and it not just
being someone says there will be cut
scenes and then a writer comes in and
writes the cutscenes. It's thinking
about the the narrative as a bit more
integrated with the game design. So,
that's where this term comes from. terms
of like my background and experience
with this. My first studio job in my
late 20s, I did a bunch of the writing
on Amateur Surgeon 4, which was kind of
writing cutscenes. I've done a bunch of
weird experimental narrative stuff
before. There used to be a bot on
Twitter called Strange Voyage. It was
like a generative story bot that I made
and some weird Twine games like this one
down here, which was like a cyberpunk
game where you're scanning people's
brains and then interpreting haiku that
came out of their brains. and deciding
uh what brain disease they had based on
that. Uh during my sort of more academic
teaching career when I was at Christ
Church, I developed the narrative design
module there. So when students have
finished their first year and they got
to choose their electives and if they
chose narrative, they got a module with
me where we did narrative for a whole
semester. Um so that's kind of my
background. I won't go into this too
much but you know sometimes when
someone's new they want to go who's this
person and why are they teaching me this
stuff? But because we are indie game
developers, I'm going to be going
through some of the literature on
narrative and some of the stuff that
comes from books about game narrative
and then making sure we think about it
in a kind of practical sense of what's
actually practical to do as a small-time
developer cuz I feel like that's an
element that often gets missed out. we
kind of use AAA examples or we analyze
high indie games and then we don't think
about whether it's like a relevant uh
example for us to use as a
developer. So, we're going to be
thinking about characters and
characterization. Um, what sort of
things do we need to think about in
order to make characters who feel
believable? And maybe believability
isn't always the goal. Maybe there are
other goals that we have for our
characters depending on what sort of
game we're making and that sort of
thing. So, lots of things to sort of
take away and think about in relation to
your own work. And the second one, the
exercise I'm going to give you towards
the end is writing an argument. So, I
think this is a really good exercise to
do if you are making a dialogue driven
game. Um, it's also a good exercise to
do to help you figure out stuff about
your game world, even if you don't
intend to put the argument in the game
itself. This is quite a helpful
exercise. You don't have to do it. I've
always found it kind of helpful and and
people have found it helpful with their
own projects when they've done it. So,
um that will come up at the end of this.
Before we get on to the specifics to
talking about characters, there are
obviously a bunch of different things to
think about in terms of game narrative
design. And we're focusing mostly on
characters today. Who are they? What do
they think? Why should we care about
them? If you're making characters in a
game, you want players to have some sort
of emotional reaction to them. You want
players to care about them and want to
protect them or hate them and want to
destroy them. You don't want a bunch of
beige characters that don't provoke some
sort of feelings. And then we've got
locations. And we're going to tie these
together a little bit when we come to
that argument exercise at the end
because we're going to think about what
do characters think about the world
they're in and stuff. But obviously the
whole idea of environmental storytelling
and the history of a world is a whole
other topic that we can do a whole other
workshop on at some point. So we're
going to be less focused on this today.
And then the last category here that I
think is perhaps one of the most
important ones for game designers to
think of uh but maybe not the focus for
today is you know you should always be
thinking about all of the ways that your
game can tell a story that don't involve
these things. Right? Films have
characters and locations. Radio plays
have characters and locations. Books
have them. But games have a bunch of
different narrative devices that don't
exist in other media like flavor text
and and things like that. So, we're
going to talk in a minute about the
practicality of adding characters and
dialogue to a game and the sort of
issues it can raise for a developer,
particularly if you're not a writer as
well. And that's why it's always
important to be thinking of like what
other storytelling tools and techniques
can you get out of your game's mechanics
and its interface. And this third thing
is not really the focus of this talk,
but by the time we finished talking
about characters and writing characters
and writing dialogue, it might kind of
push you away from writing characters
and thinking more about this kind of
stuff or like how can I tell a story
mainly through my gameplay and my
location rather than, you know, adding
dialogue where I don't feel confident in
in adding dialogue and so on. Then we've
got these more practical
considerations that everyone needs to
think about really if you're thinking of
making games or you're making games
currently. The first one, and this is
the stuff they often don't really cover
in books on narrative design, is the
implementation workload. So when you
come up with a narrative approach of
saying, "Oh, we're going to have text
boxes that come up and dialogue options
or whatever," how much work does that
make for you, right? in terms of
technical implementation. Having
characters that speak to you is one
level of complexity. You know, being
able to answer them back is another
layer of complexity. Being able to
answer them back and then have them
remember stuff and have them care and
respond to what you said, that's another
layer of complexity, right? And we might
just be at a stage of using our game
engine or whatever where the thing we
want to do with narrative is is not
there for us. And it might be that you
end up looking up uh like middleware or
you know modules people have written. So
I've worked with some people on a Unity
game recently and they wanted a visual
novel section and we ended up kind of
buying a license for a pre-created set
of UI and stuff for visual novels within
Unity. So those are considerations. you
know, if you're if you're dreaming up a
game and you haven't really sat down and
programmed it yet, all of the stuff
about your narrative approach and how
you tell your story is going to create
you more work as a as a developer. So,
that's worth thinking about. And then
over here in the pink text, we've got
your storytelling career. By this, I'm
thinking how many times have you written
down a story, whether it's for a game or
anything else. Have you written anything
before? And do you know how to write a
story? Are you making use of skills
you've practiced before, or are you
learning completely new ones? Because if
you're suddenly having to write or write
in a mode you've never written in
before, that could be a really fun thing
to learn. But the fact that it's a new
thing to learn could also be something
you want to consider and maybe uh limit
how much of it is because this is going
to sound very negative. But let's say
you're very good at programming action
games and you make a fantastic action
game and you decide to inject all this
story in it. you've never really written
a story before. You've never really
written dialogue or whatever it is. And
maybe you don't have the skills to judge
whether it's good or not. And all of
that effort you put into adding that
element might make the thing you're
making worse in some way, introducing
more problems to your games or making it
weaker in one area. So these are these
kind of five things are like the broad
things about storytelling in games I
think everyone should consider before
they even decide that their game's going
to have a story, you know. And then
there's this other aspect of like you
know the relationship between the
technology and the storytelling is the
tools that you use or the tools that
you're learning to use are going to
shape what type of story it's easy to
tell. So examples here I've got Twine
which is a pros engine. I've got ReMI
which is mostly for writing interactive
dialogue. And then uh the Unreal Robot
man standing in a field. If I'm using
something like Unreal or Unity and I'm
using a 3D engine and I'm making a game
set in an environment, then it feels
like the the storytelling in my game is
naturally going to lean towards
environmental storytelling and put
putting things in the environment to
tell a story. The difference between
Twine and Rempire is an interesting one.
I don't know if anyone in the chat has
used either of these before. A lot of
narrative design courses will start
people off off on Twine because they
think it's simpler cuz it doesn't have
art. But in order to be able to make a
good twine, you basically have to be
able to write quite well because it's in
pros. You wake up in the morning and the
sunlight streams through the window and
you think about your life, blah blah
blah. The kind of textbased interactive
fiction sort of assumes that that's the
main thing you're doing, right? When I
used to teach this course at university,
I started students off in REMI because
then they would be focusing entirely on
making characters and making them speak
to each other and to the player. And
that is an easier place to start because
you can just think about how real people
speak. You're not having to think about
like the narrative voice of a book,
which is kind of what you have to do if
you're writing in Twine. And the other
thing is if you focus first on writing
character dialogue, that is a form of
writing that is much more transferable
to other forms of games, right? Because
nearly every game with characters in has
characters speaking to each other. But
most games do not have like book style
pros in unless it's a very specific type
of game. These are all again just broad
things to consider that aren't
necessarily to do with the main topic
today, but I thought it might be worth
thinking about them up front. So part
one, what even are characters? When we
look at a piece of fiction and we see
characters in it, it's just like, oh,
there's a there's a little guy and he's
in the screen. There's there's a person
in the screen that's a character, right?
What I want us to focus on here is
characterization as a process. Because
when we talk about
characterization, the idea behind that
is that the author or authors have made
deliberate choices to create a
character. And the more that we pay
attention to those deliberate choices,
the easier it will become to make them
for ourselves. Great quote by Mik Bal
2009 book on narratology, the study of
narrative. character is not a human
being, but it resembles one. It has no
real psyche, personality, ideology, or
competence to act, but it does possess
characteristics that make readers assume
it does. As creatives, making narrative
media with characters in, we are doing
characterization in order to make our
readers or our audience feel like this
character on the screen has these
qualities of a real person, right? We
want them to feel like this is a person
with a psyche, their own brain and
personality, their own belief system,
their own kind of desire to do things,
an ability to do things. But we have to
do that through a process of
characterization. Video games put us in
a weird situation when it comes to
characters cuz we have these things that
look like humans, but they are missing
lots of the qualities of characters.
You've got characters like uh Trevor
from GTA 5 over here. He has his own
sort of behaviors and personality that
are completely independent from anything
the player does. And that means he's a
character in the narrative sense that we
would call a character in a movie or a
book or whatever. And then at the other
end of the scale, we've got they walk
around like a person, but we don't
really know anything about their
personality or anything like that. So
I've put Chell from Portal as an example
of this. you know, we would call it a
character because that's generally what
we call people in media, but it doesn't
have a personality and it's it's there
for us to sort of move around as a
vehicle. And then in the middle, you've
got someone like Shep from Mass Effect
where you've got a bit of both
qualities. You know, they have a bit of
their own personality, but it's a kind
of a bit defined by players choices.
There's a bit of a limitation on that
where they say, right, you know, this
character is not going to do anything
massively evil. That's kind of within
the limits of what a good space captain
should do, right? You get some choices,
but none of them really take you outside
of this kind of rough idea of what they
have for the character. So, it's it's a
continuum. And that means that we have
characters with a high level of
characterization. Characters where we
have this sort of flexible
characterization where the player picks
and chooses different traits. And then
characters where there's not actually
much characterization of them in the
game. And if we want it, we sort of have
to make it up in our own head. This
actually was taken from like a a teen
English literature syllabus. I got this
from in the UK. Elements of
characterization we've got here. We've
got physical appearance, the background,
like where the character comes from, and
then if you think of Shepherd in Mass
Effect, we get to choose their
background. We get some different
background choices, and we can decide if
they're like a street kid or I can't
remember what the other ones are, but
that's going to define something about
the character. If you are making like a
fantasy game or a sci-fi game, the
background of the character is going to
tie into your world building in some
way, right? They are a a dwarf who hates
elves, that kind of thing. And that's a
good way to sort of tie the things the
characters care about to the world that
you want players to invest in. We've got
personality,
uh, which is, you know, their psyche,
how they how they respond to different
things, how they feel about different
things, the kind of patterns of how they
think that come out through their speech
and behavior, which is down here as
another point. We got their
relationships with other characters. Uh,
their motivation, what they want, what
they're trying to do. And the the
motivations of characters are often what
lead us into conflicts and interchange
as well. You'll often hear writers talk
about how, you know, car characters need
to change throughout stories or they
need to at least be trying to change in
some way. Uh because that is where we
get the conflict that makes the story
interesting. And one of the things you
can do to make your story most
interesting is have characters that
share some motivations and clash on
others. Right? So a classic example of
this would be a Dungeons and Dragons
party where everyone is agreed that they
need to go and stop the evil baron, but
members of the party have different
approaches or different ideas about what
is the correct way to do that. So we've
got our eight elements of a character
and one of the things I want us to think
about is this stuff in relation to
player characters. We've got four types
of player character here. And if you're
wondering how useful is this to a game
developer, and I would say a useful way
to use this framework, I'm going to go
through and describe what these mean in
a minute, but a useful way to think of
this is, you know, in your game with,
have you actually nailed down what your
player character is out of these four
categories? Because if you're making a
game with a player character in at the
moment and you're sort of hovering
between these categories, you might find
that your game is confusing because it's
not uh consistent about its approach to
the player character and do they have a
personality? Do they speak or are they a
Gordon Freeman? So, are four types of
player character that you can have. The
first one is a cipher. It's a character
that has no discernable personality.
They're a blank slate. And you might
look at little foxy pants from Tunic and
think, well, they have a personality.
They they have personality in their
animation and how they're presented and
stuff, but really we mean in terms of
the narrative and like how they talk
really. You can have an animation that
has personality in it, but still have a
character that doesn't necessarily have
a personality. These characters have no
clear motivations or desires, or if they
do, we have to infer them. They're not
stated in any way and players bring them
to life with their own imaginations.
Here, I think it's really important to
understand that when we say these
characters have no personality, it's not
a criticism. It's just a sort of
classification of how these work in the
narrative. I think in any other medium,
we would think that saying a character
has no personality would be a bad thing,
but we can probably think of how Tunic
and Halflife are improved by this fact
in some way. I haven't played Tunic. I
know it has a lot of puzzling in it and
I know Halflife has a lot of puzzling in
it and I think the fact that the uh the
character doesn't do what the characters
in God of War do and sort of go hey I
think this is a puzzle and I think that
kind of adds to how these games feel
right because HalfLife has a lot of sort
of environmental physics puzzles in and
stuff and Tunic has a bunch of puzzles
and these are games that want you to
work things out for yourself and feel
smart. So I think when we think about
the relationship between the style of
game and the choices about the
protagonist, we can start to think that
well no personality or at least no voice
actually does something positive in the
context of this game because it allows
the voice that's in the head of the
player as they're working things out to
be more important than a character on
the screen. The main point here is you
can have a main character with no
personality and that can be a good thing
if it's in the right game context.
Then we've got the fixed character,
which is almost like the opposite end of
the spectrum from the cipher, right?
This is a character where the character
is written by an author and whatever you
do in the game as a player is not going
to change the personality of that
character. You control them in action
segments of the game, but the player is
not controlling their personality. The
player is not making decisions about who
this person fundamentally is. If you're
going to pull this off, if you're going
to make a meline or an Alan Wake, uh,
and you're going to do it well, you
probably need to be a really good writer
because you're not leaving much up to
the imagination of the player. This
route requires like a higher level of
attention to the stuff we talked about
earlier, like the different ways you
characterize a character. And then we've
got two more types. We've got the
customizable character. Everything that
this character does is a product of
players choices. And you can already
start to think about how each of these
categories has different things you have
to do as a developer if you want to do
it right because this means we don't
necessarily have to write a convincing
character cuz the player is going to
make up their own character, but we do
have to give them loads of options for
how the character looks or how the
character uh speaks or whatever. And
then and you've got to this where you
have a customizable character with a
fixed background. So, this is a
character that has some predefined
achievements, probably a name and a role
like captain in Mass Effect, but players
define how they look and behave, right?
This is the one that Boware does a lot.
There's like a mix of stuff here in
terms of how much of it is written and
how much of it is up to the player to
decide. But to think about these in a
practical
sense, each of them kind of requires
different stuff from us as game
developers. If we make a character who's
a cipher, I think if you go down this
route of having a a voiceless
protagonist in your game, you can
totally do that, but you need to think
about what's appealing about them and
the visual communication around that cam
character and what that character
represents. You know, is it a cute
character we're supposed to care about?
Is it like a edgy character that's
supposed to feel cool to move around and
destroy stuff with? there's so much more
weight on that stuff because the
character doesn't have a voice, right?
So again, just going through these four
categories that are quite abstract and
instead of just treating them as a
taxonomy, trying to think about the pros
and cons of using them as a developer.
Uh the fixed character, we need them to
be appealing and we need these
characters to be well written because
we're asking the player to stop playing
for a couple of minutes while they talk
and they say stuff that the player has
nothing to do with. having this kind of
character where they speak in cutscenes
and everything and that is not something
where the player is getting to intervene
and make choices, then there needs to be
something inherently entertaining or
moving about that character performance
in some way. So again, this is going to
be the most intensive one in terms of
like traditional writing skills and
being able to write good dialogue that
makes people care about the character.
So these are very very opposite to each
other and you can almost say like hey if
you can already write write a game with
a fixed character. If you can't write
but you can make cool looking stuff
maybe make a game with a cipher
character. And then as you can imagine
these these two categories are going to
need customization systems and content.
So you remove some of the need for the
character to be well written because the
player is choosing dialogue options
instead of the character speaking for
themselves. But now you need to have
like different trees of uh like
backgrounds or whatever the system is in
the game in order to support this sense
of the the player making choices about
the character. So every one of these
different protagonist types we can
choose has pros and cons in terms of
what you need to do as a developer to to
achieve it and make it work. Miraculous
said in customizable character games,
the dialogue options still need to be
well written. Yeah. And it's not
something we're going to focus on today.
And I'll probably do another session at
some point in the future about player
choice in game narrative. But good
writing when it comes to player choices
in games comes down to this thing. It's
like player expression. You will see
patterns in games of dialogue choices
where you know in a Fallout game it
might be a lot of situations give you a
nice option, a absolute [ __ ] option
and then a like pragmatic option that's
like give me more money and they will
just kind of stick to that framework a
lot of the time. And that is kind of
helpful to players cuz they sort of know
what to expect from those options. But
depending on the type of game you're
making, you want might want like higher
or lower levels of predictability. And
if you're really going for social
realism, for example, you might have
characters that don't want you to keep
asking them questions all the time,
right? Whereas a a traditional RPG, the
dialogue trees are just there to sort of
teach you about the world and the
situation. cuz most RPGs have quite
predictable dialogue trees where it's
like you get given a quest, you get the
option to ask some questions about it.
Most of those questions aren't really
going to do anything except give you a
bit more context around it. And there's
usually an option that's just like,
"Yeah, yeah, let's get on with it type
thing." Whereas a game that's going for
like more of a detective kind of
scenario or more social realism might
sort of reward or punish you for
exploring the the dialogue trees in
different ways. It's definitely a a
whole topic for us to to think about in
a in a future workshop. I think I'm
going to do the midpoint plug now. This
is the 2 minutes where I advertise some
stuff. Midpoint plug. Midpoint plug. If
you want me to help you onetoone with
anything to do with your game, I've got
a new website, indiegamecl clinic.com,
where you can find out about my private
coaching services, where you can find
out about my design consulting. So,
private coaching is you make your game
and I help you. Design consulting is you
make your game and also I make part of
your game. And you can also find out
about other stuff we do on this channel
there like Indies Under the Knife and
you can submit your game to that. We've
also got a Discord community that you
can join uh either through the Patreon
or by supporting this channel as a
channel member. And by doing that, you
help support this channel so I can do
more stuff like this. We have a very
active Discord community with a very
strong culture of mutual feedback. I'm
on there most days and most questions
that people have about their games, I
chip in and answer them if and when I
can. We've built up a really nice
culture in there of people feeding back
on each other's uh games. People have
like threads where they just come in
every couple of days and post their prog
progress and so on. And it's just nice
to have a slightly more closed community
than a subreddit or or whatever because
you get to know people. And also, I do a
monthly play test of just games from the
Discord community. The next one of those
is on April 29th. So, if you're in the
chat and you're already part of our
Discord, maybe your game is going to be
showing up in this one on April 29th.
That's the midpoint plug. We can get on
to part two. How do characters speak?
Let's think about dialogue in game. So,
when characters speak, how do they
speak? And one of the first things I'd
encourage you to think about is the
overall tone of the game that you're
going for and what the dialogue is for.
Right? So, these are kind of three modes
that I think games operate in a lot of
the time. We've got something like Night
in the Woods where we're going for
social realism and naturalism, which is
like characters speaking like real
people. They've got their own little
quirks to how they speak. They've got a
sort of kind of uh in-group language of
how the young people speak to each other
and stuff like that. They don't speak
like characters in an epic quest or I
guess the opposite of that in terms of
tone. You get this a lot in high
fantasy. You get it a lot in dark
fantasy and in epic sci-fi. the sort of
theatrical melodramatic register where
you've got a character who is talking
like they are in a sort of Saturday
morning kids TV show, right? Very over
the top. Uh not not at all modeled on
how people speak in the real world, more
modeled on things like how characters
speak in Shakespeare or Star Wars or
anything like that. And of course, you
can go between these and it's often a
source of great comedy to have like a
character that is speaking in this
theatrical melodramatic mode and then
who sort of dips into saying something
really normal and down to earth, right?
You can jump between these modes and
sometimes that's very effective and very
funny to do that. It's worth thinking
about these sorts of things of like does
your game have an overall tone where
everyone is always speaking like they
are in a in a play or is this like a
distinction between characters? Like
maybe you've got a character that speaks
more like they're in Night in the Woods
and they're very down to earth and then
you have a character that speaks more
like they're in Darkest Dungeon and
they're completely over the top. That
can be an interesting like distinction
between characters as well. The other
thing that complicates games
specifically is we have this kind of
stuff. This is a character that speaks,
but they're not really a character. They
are a tutorial being. So, it introduces
this other weird type of language that
isn't really narrative. And that that's
why we need to think about the purpose
of the dialogue because this guy is just
here to tell us how to play the game and
to give us tips. Like since I started
doing reviews on this channel, I've
definitely seen some situations where
someone has tried to make the
functional, informative tutorial text
have a bit more of a voice, and it just
makes the game confusing cuz you can't
tell when it's being tutorialized. And I
think Darkest Dungeon is a good example
of this. Uh, a lot of the tutorial text
and the pop-ups and stuff are not
actually written in uh this guy's voice,
right? So you have a very dramatic kind
of uh uh voice for all the narrative
stuff in the game. But when the game is
just telling you how to do combat or
giving you strategic advice, it is in
functional language. It's not in this
kind of flowery dramatic language
anymore. Another thing to think about is
dialogue directionality. I've called it
here. So played Moonsh a couple of weeks
ago. This is a really good example of
one-way dialogue where the player
character doesn't speak, right? And we
see this loads in old school JRPGs. You
go up to characters in the world and the
characters have stuff to say. This
basically means, and if again, if we
think about it in terms of like
development practicality, this means you
get to write a little bit of dialogue
for loads of different characters and
your player character can be a blank
slate. And then in Celeste, player
character does speak, but the player
doesn't impact that in any way. The
player character just speaks to
characters in the world, and we don't
have anything to do with that. And then
in Mass Effect, we've got two-way
dialogue between the player and
characters in the world, and the player
is actually sort of choosing how that
plays out. And again, these are all
going to give you a different feel.
These are the two modes I guess of uh
player character dialogue in sort of
action adventure games. We can have a
player character that speaks to
characters in which case again they have
to be likable in a particular way or we
can go the moonshere route of silent
protagonist
uh which is actually the Zelda route as
well. Silent protagonist and characters
in the world speak at them. So, I'm not
going to go through every single one of
these things and say here's how you can
make sure your character speaks about
their relationships, but you can kind of
use it as a checklist, right? And
imagine that that a dialogue has, I
don't know, 12 uh clicks in it in terms
of like text boxes coming up. How many
of these text boxes are doing more than
one thing at once? Cuz that can be a
good sign that you're packing a lot in.
Jazz just mentioned that you can use the
character text HUD and text speed to
show personality for the characters.
Yeah, and that's a really good example
of like what I was talking about right
at the beginning about making sure
you're thinking about your game and
genre and you know the affordances of
video games that allow you to tell
stories in different ways compared to
other media, right? Because that kind of
text animation thing gives us a sense of
like a speech pattern. Um, you can even
have a different font for different
characters, right? I wouldn't recommend
doing it too much. Terry Patchet used to
do it in Discworld where death speaks in
capital letters, right? And that kind of
makes you read his voice in a particular
voice in your head even though you're
you're just reading a book. This is a
good exercise I've seen people uh
describe for any kind of script writing.
If you've got a script for a scene of
dialogue in a game or any other kind of
media, if you can redact the names of
the characters and still tell who is
who, then that's a that's a good sign
that the characters have different
voices. This is an example from friends.
I don't think this is a very good
example. The idea is that your
characters will have different ways that
they speak. you know, car. You might
have one character that uses filler
words more and says
uh kind of a lot, right? Like I do. I
think uh My Little Pony: Friendship is
Magic is a very good example of
characters that speak very differently
according to their personality. Welcome
to Indie Brony Clinic, the channel where
you can learn narrative design through
My Little Pony. Uh what's the really shy
one? Fluttershy is the really shy one,
right? talks like Eeyore from Winnie the
Pooh. Uh those are examples of
characters that have very different
speech patterns. So if you redacted the
the names in the script of Friendship is
Magic, you'd very quickly be able to see
who was speaking at which point.
Okay, this is the exercise that I want
you to do. And I can almost guarantee
that by doing this, you will come away
with a better sense of what you're
trying to make and how it works. Now,
you can actually do it in the game if
you think it will be beneficial to do
it, but this is a very particular type
of exercise, and it may be that it's not
actually relevant to your game in terms
of the thing it produces. Lots of
writing exercises are not about creating
a scene to put into your movie, right?
Like when you do character interviews
for a book, that's not for you to use.
It's just for you to understand the
character. But let's say you're in a
situation where you're not currently
making a game and you want to
practically do this. There are a couple
of different approaches. You can do it
as a traditional script where you write
the characters names down and then write
out what they say. Uh I know people that
do this in spreadsheets now cuz it's
just quicker and easier. Or you can use
it as an excuse to go and dabble in
Twine or Rempire and have your first dip
into one of those things. If you're
currently not working on a game and
you're interested in making narrative
games, I would say this is a really good
excuse to just have your first hour of
messing around in Twine or Rempeni. You
can use any of these media or you can
just sit on the public transport and
talk to yourself out loud and keep
changing voices like Gollum and you can
freestyle it in a public place and
people will back away from you slowly or
they'll arrest you and put you in some
sort of secure facility. It's up to you.
So the
exercise sounds deceptively simple. It
is to write a disagreement between two
characters in your fictional
world about your fictional
world. Okay? So, two characters in your
world are arguing and they're arguing
about something in your fictional world
and they should be arguing about some
interesting thing in your fictional
world. They probably shouldn't be
arguing about whether or not pineapple
goes on pizza, right? cuz that's not
going to help you in the context of this
exercise. Two characters from your world
having an argument about something
specific to your world, something
defining about your world, something
about your world that's different from
our world. And I think you can probably
already guess how this would be a
helpful exercise cuz it's going to make
you think about a bunch of stuff. And
what I want you to think about is all of
these overlaps. Like the easy version of
this task is just writing this
conversation as if there's no player
there, right? So, the characters are
arguing about something in the world.
And through that argument, we're going
to learn about these two characters and
their relationship. And we're going to
learn about the world and a disagreement
that these characters have about the
world. Right? Cuz we've all had this
experience of playing a game with a big
law dump. And we just think, I don't
care about this world. Why are you
telling me all this stuff? Right? One of
the best ways to make players care about
your fictional world is to show how it
matters to the characters. And one of
the ways you can show how it matters to
the characters is having them disagree
on it. Right? Some things to consider.
How can we learn about the game world
through the characters and their
disagreements, right? So maybe our world
has some big historical event that
happened in the past and our characters
disagree on it. Or
maybe we have a character that just
cares a lot about that and a character
that doesn't and wants to move on. Or it
could be something that's going on
currently in your game world, the big
war, or uh I guess if we go into cozy
games territory, the uh the big uh
corporate supermarket moving into town,
some big thing going on in the game
world and two characters disagreeing
with that. Or it could be about the
future of the world. It could be about a
uh course of action. So the example that
I gave earlier from a Dungeons and
Dragons campaign where you got
characters who are on the same side,
they loosely agree about what needs to
be done, but they don't agree on how to
do it. Right? That's another example
about of two characters disagreeing
about something in the world. Right? We
want two characters that are different
from each other and we want their
personality to come out in this
argument. So how do these characters
argue differently? Right? uh you you you
know you might find this particularly
cathartic if it gives you an opportunity
to think about like how different people
uh in your life uh communicate in
different kinds of dysfunctional
manners. How do these characters argue
differently? How do they approach this
conflict differently? And what is their
existing relationship? What are their
relationships with like with other
characters? You know, what type of
language does each character use? And
the easy way to have characters that
speak differently is just to have them
have such different backgrounds that
naturally they speak differently. Like a
wizard is going to speak differently
from a barbarian, right? You're doing
this exercise to work out what those
characters are what what about those
characters do they share? Uh and what
about those characters is is different
from each other and then sort of
expressing their different viewpoints on
the world through this argument as well.
And like I said, the output of this, it
could be game content, but it's more
like the this is like the writing
equivalent of doing concept art. You're
writing a scene, and you might not even
be making a game that has these kind of
scenes in it where characters speak to
each other. But by writing this scene,
you would kind of get to a better
understanding of who your characters
are, who what's going on in your world.
When you've got like a fantasy or sci-fi
world that you've come up with, the law
or the big thing that's going on in the
world is often not as inherently
interesting to players as we'd think.
And what tends to be more interesting in
it in about it is like the different
interpretations of it available that the
characters represent. So if you imagine
X-Men, right? Think of X-Men. You've got
a world conflict in that between humans
and mutants, right? And that's a big
point of the story. But the major
conflict is really like the mutants
internal conflict about how do you
approach that? There are different
approaches. One is the kind of
isolationist let's go away from the
world and we'll prove to the humans that
we're safe and that we're helpful, which
is what Professor Xavier represents. And
then the sort of uh I guess is it kind
of fascist? I don't know what Magneto
wants to do, which is to say actually
we're better than humans and we
shouldn't let them oppress us and we
should fight them. Right? If we think
about the relationship between the world
building there and the characters, the
world building of there are mutants with
superpowers is not inherently
interesting. It's not where the
narrative conflict comes from. The
narrative conflict comes from the
characters disagreeing about what to do
about the world, right? And that's
that's where we get that interesting
dynamic. So, I hope this sort of makes
sense as an activity you could go off
and do because I do think like
regardless of what sort of game you're
making, doing this sort of activity can
really help give you a handle on the
kind of world you're building as well as
the characters that inhabit it. You can
make your disagreement about pineapple
pizza if you want, but it's not going to
teach you as much about your game world,
right? And like like I said, this this
workshop was really focused on
characters and what are characters and
all the weird things we have to think
about to make good characters in video
games. And and sometimes, you know, that
that idea of the cipher, sometimes you
want a character that doesn't talk and
just gets out of the way so the player
can inhabit them, you know. Uh but this
this exercise gets you to start thinking
about the relationship between the
characters and the world and how do the
characters fit into
