Today I want to talk to you a little bit
about game genres and two other terms
I'm going to use mood and mood. So today
when we're talking about genre and
classifying games the purpose of this is
so that we can try to make better games
or to understand what we're making a bit
better so that we can do a better job as
game developers. It's about thinking
about the categories we use and whether
they are helpful to us as designers. And
the approach that I'm going to show you
today is aimed at trying to help you to
avoid some really common pitfalls that I
see developers get into. One of those is
genre mashups that are unsuccessful
because the things don't fit together or
they can't make them fit together. The
second one is prematurely adding a lot
of content and systems that your game
doesn't need because you've set out to
make a particular type of game and you
assume that it needs certain things in
it. So you start with them and perhaps
they weren't the best things to start
with when you're in the early stages of
making your game. And thirdly, a really
common issue is starting a game that
you're not really equipped to make at
the moment based on your current skills
in art and technology. All of these are
really common issues that I see on this
channel. And you might be thinking, what
qualifies this guy to tell me all of
this? You know, I've worked as a game
designer professionally for a decade.
I've taught design to university
students and I like to think that's kind
of what I do here on YouTube as well.
The the content I produce is aimed at
that level. It's aimed at adults who
already know a fair bit about game
design and want to learn more. Most
importantly for the purpose of this
video is that I've reviewed more than 80
of your games in the last 10 months. So,
in the under a year that this channel
has been running, you have sent me
dozens and dozens of your games and I've
reviewed them. And some of the issues
I'm talking about in this video come
from my observations about the games
that I've played while making this
channel. So when we think about genre
and what it's for, we often think of it
in terms of consumers trying to identify
the things they like. So you go into a
bookshop and you know you like horror
and because horror is a recognized
category of books, they can have a
horror section and you can go over there
and find what you want in the horror
section. Right. On Steam, we have tags
which are a lot broader than the concept
of genre. And if I look at this list of
tags, I would say 3D platformer to me
that reads as a game genre. But these
other things are something else. They're
different types of categorization of
games. But in order to have a helpful
conversation about genre, we have to
understand why we're doing it. And as I
said, this is a channel for game
designers. And as a game designer, when
you have questions and thoughts about
genre, they are going to be maybe
different from the kinds of questions
and thoughts that a gamer might have.
When gamers have debates about game
genres, they're often doing it as a sort
of fun intellectual exercise. If you go
on a forum for rogue likes, there will
be people having these kind of fun
philosophical debates or arguments about
what is or isn't a rogike and so on. And
the stakes of that for them are maybe
winning an argument, maybe arguing for
argument's sake. And that is not really
what we're interested in doing here.
We're not interested in the concept of
genre so that we can say strictly this
is this type of game. That might be a
helpful thing to do, but as developers,
we have other concerns. Maybe looking at
the type of game we're trying to make
and understanding other games in the
same category so that we can say, how
does this game work? because I want to
do as well as that popular game. I want
to do better than that game. I want to
understand, you know, what people expect
from this genre, what the problems with
the genre are and how I can fix it. We
have a different set of concerns to the
average gamer. We might share some
concerns, but that's because developers
are gamers and generally we pick genres
to make that we like playing. So, of
course, there is some overlap. Point is
that this is not a video that is
interested in having one of those kind
of forum conversations about strictly
putting things in pigeon hole boxes like
a paleontologist would do with dinosaur
bones. What we're trying to do here is
identify some common issues that game
developers have with the concept of
genre which often lead to them making
games which don't do as well as they
thought they would. Most of you will
have heard this ethmology before. Genre
comes from genus which is a Latin word
meaning a category or type of things
that are the same in some way. And
nowadays we tend to use genre for a
category of media. So hip-hop is a genre
of music. Western is a genre of movie
and so on. In film studies we've had
people theorizing about this for
decades. So Rick Alman gave us these top
two types of genre. So, a semantic genre
is a genre of film where we can identify
it by seeing the things in the film. We
see the characters, what they're
wearing, uh where the film is set, and
we say, "Oh, that's a western because
it's in a desert and someone's wearing a
cowboy hat." So, that would be a
semantic genre, a genre that is defined
by its individual parts that you can
see. And then in Alman's model, you've
got syntactic genres, genres that are
defined by the shape of the story,
what's happening in the story, and what
the story is about. So something like a
mystery would be an example of a
syntactic genre because it is defined by
its structure rather than its
iconography. But eventually gave in and
introduced this third category called
pragmatic genres which basically means
that genres are whatever fans and
critics say they are. Which kind of
brings us back to the idea of fans
debating things on forums because they
enjoy it. This is a sort of I'll know it
when I see it approach to genre. And
when you think of the ways that we
classify games, you could think of a
category like cozy as being something
like this. There isn't really a clear
structural definition of what makes a
cozy game. There's elements of both of
these. Really, it is something that is
kind of it's cozy because people that
like cozy games say it's a cozy game
type thing. In literature studies, we
get genre, which is what we were talking
about before. you know things like
fantasy, horror, western um that are to
do with what the story is loosely about
and the things it contains. And then we
have this other concept of mode which is
more like the structure of the story,
how the story is told to us and framed.
It's much broader than the genre. So
something like realism or magical
realism or social realism are examples
of modes. Something like satire is a
mode. Now, these two terms are used
quite differently by different literary
theorists, and I don't want to get into
too much detail about that now, but the
point is that I'm going to be using this
concept of mode to help us come up with
better classifications for games where
we're not thinking of every different
type of game as being a different genre.
So, just to give you another example of
genre and mode, here we have Bram
Stoker's Dracula, which is a horror
novel. Most of us know that even if
we've never read it, that is the genre
that it fits in. And we can tell that
from like films that have been made of
it and so on. But the thing that is
different about this book that you
perhaps don't get when you watch a film
of Dracula is that it is in the mode of
an episttolary novel. Now, if you've
never heard that term, it's another word
for a book of letters, a story that is
constructed from documents by characters
who are sending each other letters and
and so on. It's a different format for
telling a story. So again, we could have
the story of everything that happens in
Dracula, all of this gothic horror genre
stuff of vampires and spooky castles and
so on, and we could have it in a
different mode. We could make it into a
fake documentary movie or so on. The
medium is the book. The genre is the
type of book it is in terms of its
contents and what it's about. And then
the mode is the kind of type of book it
is in terms of how the story is framed
and presented to us. And a more recent
example of a book that uses a similar
combination of genre and mode is World
War Z, which is a zombie book, but it is
written as a series of documents or
reports from the UN following a a zombie
apocalypse. Same sort of combination of
things going on there as in Dracula.
Now, another way of explaining this
difference, perhaps a bit of a strange
one, is if you go to have Mexican food,
Mexican is like the genre of the food is
the type of food that you are getting.
And regardless of whether I go to the
Mexican restaurant or the taco truck, I
am getting Mexican food. It's the same
genre of food, but the way that the food
is kind of presented to me and delivered
to me is the mode. And in this case, the
mode is a taco truck, and I eat it on
the side of the street. And in this
case, it's sat down in a restaurant. The
point I'm really trying to get to here
is that genre is not the only way of
classifying media. And the more ways
that you have of classifying media, the
better you can understand sort of
nuances between different types of
things. Like then you can understand
that Dracula is a horror novel, but it's
also another type of novel and these
things are working together in a
particular way. So this brings us on to
the idea of mode in video games and how
and why is this distinction useful for
developers. Now I have not come across
the idea of genre versus mode being used
in video games in the way I'm going to
use it today. And that's not me trying
to brag and say I came up with a theory.
If you read any designers talk about
this before and they've used a similar
distinction, then by all means, please
leave a comment. But again, the point
here is to try and avoid some common
pitfalls that designers have when
they're trying to think about what type
of game they're making and they're
thinking that they've got the genre of
their game nailed down, and they haven't
really. What they've got is a mode or a
mood. So, for the purpose of this video,
I want to define a game genre as
something which tells us what the player
is doing moment to moment. A game genre
usually tells us something about the
three C's of the game. The character,
the camera, and the controls. How am I
controlling the game? how is the camera
positioned and and like who am I
controlling if I'm controlling a person
or am I controlling lots of people? You
can already start to think of how
real-time strategy and platformer those
terms they already put a picture in your
mind as a gamer of where the camera is
in this game. Where is the camera
angled? Am I controlling a character?
What kind of controls am I using? Right?
Real-time strategy. I'm controlling all
of these little characters and buildings
from a camera placed above using a mouse
and a keyboard. Unless you're a sicko
like me who played the entirety of
Command and Conquer 1 on a PlayStation
because you're an absolute legend. But
mostly a real-time strategy game is a
point-and-click game. A platformer
you're thinking of controlling a little
character jumping around and you're
looking at them from the side. And I
know some of you Hollow Knight fans are
going to see this and say, "Hol's not a
platformer. It's a Metroid vania." That
is kind of leading into something we're
going to get on to in a minute, but I
would say it is still a platformer, but
Metroid Vania is a type of platformer
that it is. So, a game genre is usually
going to tell us what the player is
doing moment to moment in the game. And
it's going to tell us about these three
C's of character, camera, and controls.
And three C's is an industry term for
this particular type of design focus on
the camera and how characters move and
how the game controls. In bigger AAA
game studios, you get game designers
where this is their whole job and they
don't touch level design or systems or
economies or anything like that. Now,
what I'm going to be arguing is that if
you're using a game genre to guide your
design and you're saying what I'm making
is a card battler or what I'm making is
a cozy farming game. Whatever you
describe your game as is going to inform
your game design because it's going to
give you ideas about what you should
make based on what fans of that genre
expect. But some of the things that we
tend to call genres do not do all of
this stuff. They don't tell us about the
momentto moment gameplay. They don't
tell us how the game is supposed to
control, what characters are supposed to
involved, how they're supposed to move
around, and so on. And this can be an
issue cuz it generates some of those
problems that I talked about right at
the start of this video. I'm going to
argue that it's not helpful for game
designers to think of genre in terms of
the mood of their game like cozy or
horror or the mode of their game which
is things like rogue like Metroid Vania
and Deck Builder. And we'll get into why
I consider these modes in a minute. Now
I want you to imagine that this pyramid
represents the three important parts of
a game. And they're sort of colorcoded
here. Now, the core mechanics of what
you're doing in the game are the bottom
of the pyramid. These help define what
the player is doing over and over again
in the game, and they are the foundation
of the pyramid. Because if people don't
enjoy the main activity that they're
doing over and over again, then the rest
of the pyramid falls down, right? The
next step up the pyramid are things like
your progression mechanics. So, what are
you collecting? What are you upgrading?
What are you investing your time in by
playing this game? And these progression
mechanics are important because they
give you a reason to do things. Why am I
doing these things? What is the reward?
What is the investment? But again, this
part of the pyramid cannot stand up if
the bottom part is not in place. So, if
the bottom part is not fun or it doesn't
appeal to people or people just don't
enjoy doing that core activity over and
over again, they're not going to care
about this next tier up. they're not
going to care about getting rewards or
investing points or currency into
things, right? So, this sits on top of
the core mechanics. And then right at
the top, we've got all of the stuff is
kind of vibes. We've got the aesthetic,
the theme, and the mood. And it's
important. It could be like the deciding
factor in whether someone buys one game
or someone prefers one game over
another. But again, a game is an
activity. A game is a set of things that
you do over and over again. So having a
strong aesthetic, having a good
interesting mood or theme for your game
is not going to save a game where the
bottom and middle of the pyramid are not
strong. And you will notice at the
bottom of each of these chunks, I've
added one of the three words that this
video is about. Genre, mood, and mood.
Now, if we go from my strict definition
of genre from earlier, where it needs to
be something that tells us what the
player is doing moment to moment, then
genre is where we get our core
mechanics, right? So a platformer is a
genre and the core mechanics are things
like jumping or breaking things in the
environment or jumping on enemies to
defeat them. Those are core mechanics
that come out of the genre. Now if we
take Hollow Knight as an example, the
genre of platformer is where we get the
jumping and the kind of side view
fighting and so on. And that's what
makes Hollow Night a platformer and
that's what contributes to enjoying
playing 30 seconds or a minute of Hollow
Knight. Now, once we've got those core
mechanics that people enjoy, then people
might want to explore a world. They
might want to upgrade things or find
secrets. And that's when we move into
the next stage of the pyramid, the
progression mechanics, which here I'm
referring to as the mode. If we take
Hollow Knight as an example, again, the
mode is it's a Metroid vania and it's a
Soulslike, right? Those two terms don't
do enough to tell you what the player is
doing moment to moment. You can guess
from the term Metroid Vania that it's
also going to be a platformer, but you
know, saying a game is a Souls like,
well, you know, the original Souls games
are 3D brawlers. I've seen Souls likes
that are card games. Souls like is a
mode because it doesn't tell us about
the core mechanics. It's not a genre,
it's a mode. So, in this case, I would
put Souls like and Metroid Vania in the
purple category. They're in the middle.
They define why players are doing
things, what the rewards are, what the
kind of longerterm goals of the game
are. If the Souls like Metroid Vania
stuff doesn't work, then you don't care
if it looks pretty. And if the core
mechanics, that kind of 30 seconds of
fun of the game of jumping around and
fighting doesn't work, then you don't
care that it's a Souls like or a Metroid
vania. these things stack on top of each
other. If you're a game developer and
you don't nail this core stuff of how it
feels to do the basic activity that
you're doing over and over again in your
game and you invest a lot of time in
these other two things, there is a good
chance that you are wasting time and
throwing away more work than you need
to. So, if you're designing a game and
you start with mood, you start at the
top of the triangle, you are going to
maybe spend a lot of time in limbo,
confused about what the structure of
your game is, how players are supposed
to progress. But more importantly,
you're not going to know what your core
mechanics are, what's fun about your
game, and so on. And I see this happen a
lot because we have a lot of game
developers decide that they want to make
a cozy game or decide that they want to
make a horror game and they don't really
know what is meant to be fun in that
game moment to moment. So they've
started with an aesthetic. So how the
game looks and how it's supposed to make
people feel. And of course, if you're
smart and you really study cozy games or
you really study horror games, you study
the best in genre, you can kind of learn
from studying them what kind of game
structures that they have that make them
work, that make them feel cozy or make
them feel scary, and you can sort of
study what kind of core mechanics they
have. But if you're thinking about the
practical process of making a game, if
you haven't worked out what is fun about
moving the character around, about the
way the camera controls, about the basic
activities that you do every minute of
the game, you could spend a long time
putting blood on wolves or making
beautiful flowers sway in the wind and
you're not going to get that time back.
And that means that if you then later on
try and make these more integral parts
of your game that are the parts that
actually make it a game and you've
already spent loads of time making
beautiful art, you're going to be too
attached to it to see that it's bad. And
often you're going to just end up having
done a lot more work that you need to
throw away when eventually you realize
the project is not going anywhere. Now,
I'm not saying you should start
developing a game with no sense of what
the theme is. Some people are mechanics
first designers and they can design
mechanics in a total abstract way and
add a theme later. Some people say, "I
want to make a game about X." And they
start with the theme and then they work
out mechanics that go with it. What you
shouldn't be doing is spending ages up
here and sort of delaying working out
what your core mechanics are. You need
to work out what they are early, even if
you have an idea for what you want the
end sort of mood, theme, and aesthetic
of the game to be. Now, there are some
success stories of people accidentally
making a cozy game. Good example of this
I saw recently uh Advanced 9, the
developer of Nights put up this video
called How to Accidentally Make a Cozy
Game where he basically tells the story
of developing this cute openw world game
where he never necessarily intended it
to be a cozy game cuz he wasn't aware of
that as a type of game. When he started
showing it to people, people were
saying, "Oh, this is cozy." So then he
kind of learned more about that market
and learned more about what they want
from a game and then pivoted the game
towards that. So this is an example of,
you know, designing the core gameplay of
the game and then finding the mood of
the game as you go along. Now this is a
bit of an extreme example, but to be
honest, I've seen it enough times that
I'm now worried every time someone tells
me their game is a rogike. And what they
really mean is that something in the
game is randomized and that is supposed
to increase the possible play time
because of novelty of it being
different. And then you look at the game
and it's something like this and you
think, well, yeah, you've got a
structure for your game. You've got some
sort of progression mechanics of, you
know, playing through randomized levels
and collecting things or something. But
the basic thing that you're doing here
is not appealing and wouldn't be
appealing to the majority of players of
indie games because it's too simple.
What I'm really trying to get you to
think of with this pyramid model here is
that designing a game is creating an
activity for someone. You are giving
people something to do and the thing
that they are doing needs to be
compelling enough that they want to do
it over and over again. And in some
games they are basically collections of
mini games. So if we think back to the
example of cozy games, often we get a a
set of mechanics where none of them is
super challenging or interesting on its
own, but you put together, you know,
planting crops and fishing and lots of
little mini games about managing
different things and then the kind of
meta game of working out how to manage
all these things and find enough hours
in the day that becomes the game. But in
order to have enough activities to kind
of create that interesting tension
between do I do this today or do I do
this? What can I fit into my day, you
need to have the set of mechanics in
place in the first place or you at least
need to have a good idea of what they're
going to be because designing a game is
creating an activity for people to do.
Maybe you're building a world, maybe
you're telling a story. Those are
reasons to make a game as well. But if
the main activity of what the player is
doing in the game is not interesting,
then it's just not going to be enough.
Again, if you're thinking of rogike or
rogue light as a genre, really all that
does is define how the game plays over a
series of sessions, right? There are
randomized levels and perma death. That
doesn't really tell us what we're doing
moment to moment. So, you have this sort
of situation. You know, the levels built
themselves way. What can you do in them?
Uh, jump, right? And this might seem
like an exaggeration, but I often see
people and they say, you know, I'm
working on a rogike, so they spend a lot
of time focusing on the generation of
things and they haven't really solved
what the player is doing moment to
moment that is supposed to make the game
fun. All of this is bringing us back to
what I said at the beginning of remember
a gamer has different reasons for
putting things in a category to a
designer. We might end up with the same
categories and the same definitions of
what is a cozy game or what is a rogike
or whatever. But as designers, we need
to think a little bit more deeply about
why these things we often refer to as
game genres work. What the kind of main
parts of them that make them work or
make them appealing. And I've talked
about this before in my video, your
rogue likes are wrong. Where again,
people release games and they call them
rogue likes, but they don't really nail
the thing that people really enjoy about
rogue likes, which is often the build
variety rather than just randomized
levels. which is another example of why
as a game designer, you need to think of
genres in a way that goes beyond just
putting things in categories and starts
to nail down the basics of what makes
different genres appealing or what makes
them work or not work. Spelunky is a
great example of a game that nails what
we would call a genre mashup. Nowadays,
the idea of a platformer with
procedurally generated levels is
probably not that amazing, but when this
game came out, it really was one of the
first of its kind. And Derek used
Spelunky Book has some excellent
insights into this. Um, quick plug, I'm
starting a new podcast this month that
you will see pop up on the channel
called The Game Developers Library. And
this is the first book that myself and
my guest are going to be covering on
this podcast. We're going to take you
through it and draw out some of the
things that we think would be helpful
for game developers to learn from. So,
if you're watching this and you're not
subscribed to the channel and you want a
kind of cliffnotes version of a really
really good book about making indie
games, then do subscribe to the channel
and and watch or listen to that when it
comes up. So, in the next set of quotes,
Derek Yu talks about his reasons for
putting platformer and rogike together.
I asked myself, what is it that I like
about platformers? I'm a more
actionoriented game player and I like
how easy they are to pick up and play. I
like the tension behind each jump. What
didn't I like about platformers? I
didn't like the repetitiveness of
playing the same levels over and over
and the reliance on memorizing level
layouts to
succeed. What did I like about rogue
likes? I liked the variety that the
randomly generated levels offer and how
more meaningful death is in them. What
didn't I like about rogue likes? I
didn't like the repetitiveness of
certain tasks that were required to
succeed like poly piling and the
reliance on memorizing commands. You
have to remember here that you is
talking about old school rogue likes
where it is like a top-down grid-based
game. And what you see here is not just
a developer putting two things together
because he likes them. He's putting two
things together that he likes and using
the strengths of each one to try and
counter or fix some of the problems with
the other one. He's making a genre
mashup in order to solve design problems
rather than just because he likes these
two things. So, hey, let's put them
together and hope that they work. So,
this is an example where something that
we would think of as a genre mashup is
not just a case of putting two things
together to create novelty because they
haven't been put together before. It is
putting them together to help solve
problems with each of those things. What
is it about platformers that can help
make a rogike more interesting? And what
is it about rogue likes that can help
make a platformer better in some way?
And I've put genre mashup in scare
quotes here because in the model I'm
trying to present to you today,
platformer is the genre, but rogike or
rogike is the mode. So think back to the
pyramid from earlier. The platforming is
the momentto- moment thing we're
actually doing in the game. And the
rogike thing is something we would only
notice if we played the game for longer.
It's to do with the overall structure of
the game. Right? So, I would argue that
the reason these things work so well
together is because it's not actually
putting two genres of games together. It
is putting a platformer as the genre of
the game. What you're doing moment to
moment and then using rogike as a mode
to structure the game and how it feels
to play it over and over again or how it
feels to play a single session of it.
So, in the model I'm presenting, if you
think back to the pyramid from earlier,
the platformer mechanics are the base of
that pyramid. They're the thing that
you're doing moment to moment that you
think is fun. If you only played
Spalunky once, you would never know
about the modal stuff. You would never
know it was a rogike. So, all of this
stuff is structural. It's about what it
means to play Spelunky over and over
again. And the platformer stuff is there
to make sure it is fun. And if it's not
fun, we don't care about this modal
stuff. And remember, nothing in this
video is about word policing. I'm not
saying this to say, "Oh, you should
never refer to rogue as a genre." You
know, you should only ever think of
genres as stuff like this. What I'm
saying is in the context of this game,
what makes it successful as a mix of
things is that each of these things is
holding up a different section of that
pyramid. more examples here of things
that could be considered genre mashups,
but when you actually realize that one
of those genres is a mode rather than a
genre, the game makes a lot more sense.
Spelunky is a platformer in the rogike
mode. You are platforming and the game
is a rogike, which means that if you
play it for a long time, you will notice
structural differences to it compared to
Mario, which looks like the same kind of
game. It's a platformer, but it is not
in the same structural mode. Then you've
got Enter the Dungeon, which is a top-
down action game or a twin stick
shooter, whatever you want to classify
it as. You can tell that from looking at
this picture that that is the type of
game it is. You can see characters from
a particular camera angle and they're
shooting in directions. And then the rog
light again is the structure, right?
Rogue Legacy 2 is an interesting
example. It's another platformer. It's
another rogike platformer, but there is
an option in this game to lock the
layout of the castle. you can sort of
pay some of your gold income to keep the
castle in the same structure and you can
do that for as long as you want. At
which point you basically change the
mode of the game into a Metroid vania
because the castle becomes a big kind of
set expanse for you to explore and every
time you die it's the same and you can
just keep exploring it. Right? So that
is an example of a game that has a a
major mode of being a rogike game and
then it has an optional mode of being a
Metroid vania. Let's look at some more
historical examples. If we think of the
uh rogike or rogue light over here with
the pink text, these are kind of classic
rogue likes. And from these, you could
argue that in these cases, rogike is a
genre, right? We can look at these
games, we immediately know what they
are. But with some modern rogue likes
and with rogue lights, rogue has become
the mode because we look at these games
that actually we see a platformer or a
top- down action game. And the rogue
elements are actually to do with the the
metag game progression of this game.
When we talk about rogue based games in
general, we are talking about something
that could be a genre or it could be a
mode, right? And Caves of Cood is an
interesting example. It's not on here,
but that is a game that is generically
like a rogike where it's this very asy
art looking down from above turn-based
movement type thing, but it actually has
kind of different modes you can play it
in and you can even play it without the
perma death. Deck builders are another
example. Now, when someone tells you
they're making a digital deck builder,
you tend to think of slay the spire and
you think that someone is playing cards
to complete some sort of task or some
sort of battle and then between rounds
they build their deck. But that is an
example of deck builder functioning as a
mode. Because what we're doing in a
combat in Slay the Spire, what we're
spending 80 or 90% of our time doing in
this game is not building a deck of
cards. It's using cards. Whereas these
kind of traditional deck builders on the
left are games where every turn of the
game you are building your deck. So in
this case, deck builder is the genre
because it's what you're doing all the
time in the game. But in these games on
the right, like Slay the Spire and Loop
Hero, you are playing a game and the
long-term progression of that game is
about building a deck. But the moment to
moment gameplay isn't building a deck.
If you want an example of a digital
game, which I would put in the deck
builder as genre category, then Party
House from the UFO 50 collection is an
example of that, cuz it's it's a game
where you are building a deck of cards
every turn you play. Now, I hope at this
point what I've said so far has helped
you to understand why as a game designer
this kind of stuff is important to
understand. Now, I'm going to go back
over some of the common issues that you
can avoid if you focus on the core genre
of your game instead of the mood or
mode. Right? You focus on the bottom of
the pyramid and you can think about the
other layers of the pyramid, but you
don't put loads of work into them until
you've actually built the bottom of the
pyramid. And from my perspective, these
common issues are number one, creating
mashups without a good design reason. So
the the Derek you spelunk example is a
really good example of putting things
together in a in a thoughtful way where
you're actually trying to solve a design
problem. You're not just putting things
together because you like them and you
haven't seen someone put them together.
Right? The second one I've already
alluded to, prematurely adding
procedural generation systems. Right? If
you're making a rogike, uh if it's a
top-own shooter, if it's a platformer,
whatever type of game it is, you do not
need a level generator to make the game
fun to play 100 times until you know
that it is fun to play once. This is
particularly important if you're a new
developer, you're working on your first
game or your first couple of games, you
haven't really made anything you're
super proud of yet. You don't want to be
sinking months into making things like
procedural level generators when you
don't know that the actual game you're
making is fun. This is building the
middle of the pyramid when you haven't
built the bottom yet. And this leads
onto the next point which is less to do
with programming systems and more to do
with making levels and other type of
content like you know extra locations,
extra enemies, extra weapons. This again
is all tying into that middle section.
If you decide to make a Metroid vania
and you're like, I've got to make this
big world or you decide to make a
Soulslike and that's makes you think
you've got to make all these levels and
areas, but you haven't focused on the
bottom of your pyramid, you're going to
end up again wasting a lot of time
churning out content that you don't need
to do yet because you haven't proven
that you've got an activity that people
want to do more than once. And that
applies to other types of content like
stories and characters. Now, if you're
making the type of game that is only
stories and characters, like you're
making a visual novel or something, then
that is the base of your pyramid because
interacting with characters is your game
mechanic, right? But if you're adding
story, dialogue, character interactions
to a game that is meant to be a game
about exploring or shooting or strategy
or any of these things, you need to make
sure that those things work because
again, all of this stuff is not
foundational. It is not the bottom of
the pyramid. Again, if we think back to
this really strict definition of a genre
being, you know, where is the camera?
What is the character doing? How is the
player controlling the character or the
characters or the world in some way?
None of that is deter. None of that
really requires there to be a story or
characters or any of that stuff. That
stuff is really important to have
eventually. It can really kind of make
your game different, give it a different
appeal. It can help to explain
particular things in the game, but it is
not necessarily part of that genre base.
And then the last one is starting a game
based on mood. So that's things like
cozy or horror or mode, which is things
like, you know, rogike or deck builder
or vania or whatever which you are not
equipped to make in terms of technology
or art. And what I mean here, if you
haven't worked out what your core genre
and your main mechanics of your game
are, and instead you decide, I'm going
to make a horror game, or I'm going to
make a cozy game, it may be that making
a horror game or a cozy game is so
dependent on you being able to do
particular types of things as a
programmer, an artist that you just
can't do it. If you start with mode and
you start with something like rogike or
something that is to do with the
structure of the game, again, you might
end up with a bunch of challenges to do
with your art or your programming which
you just can't do yet. And I think this
bottom bullet point is particularly
important if you're a new developer
because what you really need to do is
make things and see what works and see
what fun you are able to get out of your
tools because there's no point setting
out to make a platformer and then
sitting down and finding out that
actually you hate programming making a
little guy run around, right? There are
other types of games you can make that
do not require you to program or animate
a little guy who runs around. Yet,
that's where so many people start
because they think, "Oh, that would be
easy. I I'll do one of those." Now, the
the point here is if you start at the
bottom of the pyramid and you start with
your core mechanics, you can quickly
work out whether or not that is a game
you want to make because you will work
out whether you have the required art
skills or programming skills to make the
core mechanics of the game. If you think
back to the rogike example, yeah, it's
great to sit down and follow a bunch of
tutorials on how to procedurally
generate a dungeon and then at the end
of that you're like, what do I do with
this now? Oh, now I have to learn how to
make a character move around and so on.
If you always start with the basic
mechanics, with the basic genre of what
is the camera doing, what is the
character doing, what is the player
doing, then you're not going to back
yourself into a corner where you
suddenly need to do animations or you
suddenly need to program features that
are just going to be beyond what you can
do at this moment. Now, I'm interested
to see what you have to say about any of
this. So, leave your thoughts in the
comments. If you've stayed all the way
through this, then I would hope you have
reasonable thoughts and you're not just
going to moan about what genre you think
Hollow Night is or not. Because if if
you're still feeling pedantic about
putting things in particular genres,
then perhaps you haven't got the point
of this video, in which case I will work
on expressing myself better next time.
Uh, if you're new to this channel and
you found this video helpful or
insightful in some way, there are lots
of other ways that I can potentially
help you get better as a game developer.
I do private coaching. I do design
consulting where, you know, maybe
someone's been working on a game for a
while and they're a bit stuck with it
and they want someone else to come in
and redesign parts of it. And I also do
a series called Indies Under the Knife
where every week I stream four games
submitted by you guys and I give my
feedback as a game designer. all of
that. You can find out more about it on
the Indiegame Clinic website,
indiegamecl clinic.com. I also have a
Patreon on
patreon.com/indygamecl clinic. Everyone
who donates to that is helping to
support this channel. I do make some
money from YouTube from AdSense, but
it's not very much. So, the Patreons are
really the reason why I keep doing this.
So, if you found this video helpful, by
all means, subscribe to the channel, go
and watch some of the other videos, and
if you find them helpful and you want
more of this kind of content, please do
support on Patreon. It's really helpful,
goes a long way. The perks of supporting
on the Patreon are that you get access
to our Discord, which is an active
community that has a very strong culture
of very productive mutual feedback. And
again, remember, I've been a university
lecturer for games for 5 years. I've
worked in the games industry for 10
years. I've done lots of different types
of teaching and coaching. So, this isn't
just a random Discord community. It is
like a virtual classroom that is aimed
at intermediate to professional level
game developers. and that's what you get
access to by being part of our Patreon.
I hope this video has helped you think
of the concept of genre more like an
analytical developer who wants to make
good games and less like a nerdy gamer
who just likes putting things in
categories cuz it's fun.
[Music]
