Throughout your gaming adventures, I'm
sure you have some memories of exploring
lush jungles, venturing through the
ruins of otherworldly civilizations, or
climbing high mountains and witnessing a
sprawling fantastical world below you.
But, have you ever wondered what makes
some levels and game spaces more
memorable than others? Well, part of
that comes from level designers, the
architects of these virtual worlds. And
today, we get to peek inside one of
their brains and learn some
world-building secrets.
Thanks so much to One Day University for
helping us get smarter.
Real quick up top, please welcome
today's guest writer, senior level
designer on The Division and Cyberpunk
2077, and the host of the podcast Level
Design Lobby, Max Pierce. Thanks, Max.
While we've discussed level design
before, we've never really dove
headfirst into the digital building
blocks of what exactly a level designer
does, or the skills they need to be one.
For the uninitiated, level designers are
game designers who specialize in
crafting the spaces in games where
players explore, fight, and overcome
challenges. You know, basically any
digital space where the player plays.
And these areas they design can take a
ton of different forms, from the
bombastic islands of Fortnite, to the
sneaky pig bill towers found in Angry
Birds, to the massive sprawling open
worlds like in Breath of the Wild, or
the more linear levels you see in The
Last of Us. But, when we say design, we
don't just mean geometry, though of
course that is certainly a major
component of the job. While building,
level designers must also take into
consideration the game's pacing, forms
of combat, types of puzzles, methods of
movement, and story beats, all while
creating a visually compelling
environment that keeps the players
hooked as they explore. However, these
lively locales aren't created in a
vacuum. In order to forge levels that
drive games forward, level designers
need to work closely with their
interdisciplinary teammates, balancing
the needs of narrative design, game
design, environmental art, lighting,
effects, audio, and others into their
own plans. Because nobody wants to have
to rebuild an entire area because they
forgot to integrate core mechanics or
important gameplay principles. So,
there's a lot of communication and
information collection through design
docs, pacing, flow diagrams, mood
boards, and more before level designers
even begin planning out their levels in
earnest. Then, once all the info is
collected and everyone's on the same
page, the level designer begins blocking
out their level in a variety of
different ways depending on their game.
Sometimes using 3D software such as 3D
Studio Max or more modular kit pieces in
commercial game engines like Unreal or
Unity. And you can think of this
blocking step as a sort of rough draft,
something that can be made and edited
quickly, which is important because a
level designer will iterate on their
blockout a lot. It'll constantly be
reviewed not just by themselves, but
also by their team to ensure it meets
everyone's needs. After the blockout has
been approved, they can move on to
crafting the finer details within the
level, weaving together any puzzles,
narrative, and combat scenes, or
whatever other finishing touches the
game calls for. And as development
progresses further, a level designer's
work shifts to testing the pacing, feel
of the encounters, and clarity of player
goals until finally the game locks and
goes live, ready to have their levels
experienced and explored by players all
over the world. Now, you might be
saying, "Dang, that sounds neat. I want
to be able to harness the power of my
imagination to craft exciting worlds
that players will never forget, that
push their skills to the max while
making them wish to never return to the
lackluster realms from whence THEY
CAME."
UM WELL, YOU'RE IN luck because Max
wanted to share a few fundamental skills
he's found to help great level designers
rise above the rest. The first and often
overlooked fundamental is that while
it's extremely tempting to jump right
into the editor and start working on
your level blockout, the best practice
as a level designer is to research key
elements of your levels first. You need
to study the types of environments where
your levels are based, gathering photo
and video references, and looking at
your team's concept art. Max's rule of
thumb is to gather around 50 references
for himself as this not only fuels his
inspiration for what ideas to pursue,
but also helps keep them in line with
the project's overall vision. And
because your job as a level designer is
to make sure your levels feel right,
you'll find that key aspects of said
research will center around architecture
and geology. Be they from a fictional
realm like Middle-earth or somewhere
real like New York City. Additionally,
through your research, you'll build up a
repertoire of architecture and geology
that you can use to communicate emotions
to your players. For example, based on
your previous tone of excitement, let's
say you want to instill your players
with a feeling of dread. Well, you might
start by researching brutalist
architecture. Or if your aim is to
overwhelm your players with awe, Art
Nouveau might have you covered.
Remember, your goal is to make something
believable, but not necessarily
realistic. Part of your job as a level
designer is learning how to take
creative liberties with the source
material to make spaces that best suits
gameplay. Next, remember to always
conceptualize and build your game with
its specific metrics in mind. Things
like required environment dimensions,
polygon and texture budgets, and NPC and
player movement abilities. Because these
allow you to plan for things like how
wide a corridor needs to be in order to
facilitate combat in it in conjunction
with the size of character models. Or
how large to make a chasm so that the
player can or cannot jump across it. Or
that you'll need to design side paths
for your players to utilize via
different skills that they unlock in
your game. Understanding your game's
specific metrics allow you to create an
environment perfectly tailored for your
game's desired experience. And once
you've nailed that down, you can more
easily design your levels with side
intention. For example, designing
smaller corridors to make the player
feel timid and weak. Or panoramic ledges
that funnel players in a desired
direction. Also, strong communication
skills are another important
fundamental. Since as a level designer,
you'll be working closely with members
of different departments and disciplines
to produce a fantastic level. So you'll
need to be able to communicate your
ideas and sell your vision, while also
listening to your team's thoughts and
needs as well. Because you never know
where the next bolt of inspiration may
strike from to make the game even
better. And finally, one last
fundamental Max has found crucial in his
level design is learning how to provide
players with guidance. A ruined tower or
a well-placed torch revealed as a player
turns a corner can give the player an
indication which direction they should
head next, helping to ensure they aren't
frustrated as they traverse their levels
and aren't completely beholden to maps
for navigation. Luckily, you have many
tools at your disposal for helping guide
your players through your levels. Things
like landmarks, signposts, shapes and
color, lighting, visual language, and
composition. These and more, in the
hands of an experienced level designer,
provide subtle nudges of clarity and
direction that make even complex
environments easy to navigate. And they
can help ensure that players are engaged
by the game's intended challenges and
not distracted by poorly planned game
space. Of course, we realize there's a
lot more we could say about level
design. But we hope that you enjoyed
this 101 overview. And if this element
of game design has awakened your inner
world builder, you can get a deeper look
into all of these concepts in Max's
latest book, Let's Design Exploration.
Just promise me all this reality
crafting power won't go to your head.
Oh, boy.
But let's say for the sake of argument
that you aren't a megalomaniacal cat
with a penchant for world domination and
you just want to quickly beef up your
brain for the betterment of mankind
without busting your budget. Well then,
you're going to feel right at home with
One Day University. One Day U brings
top-rated professors from incredible
universities together to present
fascinating lectures which you can watch
live or on demand. Seriously, this is a
pretty cool resource. Members get access
to a library of over 500 talks with new
additions being added every single week.
So you can experience the joy of
learning something new from awesome
professors talking about history,
politics, art, science, music,
psychology, and much, much more. But
with no homework or tests. Though you do
get access to live Q&A sessions with
professors. Just flipping through their
catalog, we were super keen to check out
6,000 years of religion in 60 minutes by
Saul Goldman of Tufts University, the
women who ruled the world 3500 years ago
by Kara Cooney of UCLA, and four films
that changed America by Mark Lapadula of
Yale University. And all this high-level
know-how can be yours for just $8.95 a
month or $89 a year. Oh, wait, what's
that? Yeah, you in the back. Oh, wow.
Right now you can enjoy a full year of
One Day U for 50% off the regular price?
Dang, that's a good deal. Okay, then,
just visit onedayu.com/extracredits
and sign up for an annual plan using the
code extracredits. Then you'll be
getting smarter, not working harder, and
helping support our channel while you do
it. Aw, you're the best.
A huge thanks to our legendary patrons,
Orioles 1, Kyle Mergatroid, Joseph
Blame, Dominic Valenciana, Casey Muscha,
Alicia Bramba, and Ahmed Ziad Turk.
