So, James recently just did exactly what
this episode is titled. He made a game
from scratch, specifically Cyberpunk
Legends, a narrative-driven co-op
Cyberpunk card game designed to be
learned in 10 minutes. It's also on
Kickstarter right now. Link's in the
description. I'm sure he would
appreciate the support. But, here is the
other neat part. He just handed me this
script on the topic of designing a game
from scratch in hopes that what he's
learned across the last few years making
this thing can help you with your future
projects. And not to put too fine a
point on it, but the information here is
kind of invaluable. It's actually
informed a couple projects that I'm
working on. So, I'm going to read it to
you here right now verbatim in the first
person. You ready?
Let's begin.
So, you want to design a game? Well, I'm
going to say the no-fun thing up front.
The best way to start your game design
is to start from your constraints.
Because remember, your job as a designer
is to make the best game possible, not
just dream up the best imaginable game,
and that is a trap all too easy to fall
into. For Cyberpunk Legends, I knew I
mostly was working solo on it, and that
I wanted to finally make the game that I
truly thought was as good as I could
make it. Not chipped away at by
publishers or marketing departments. So,
knowing that, I had to ask myself, what
do those constraints mean in practical
terms? Solo. This means scope has to be
small, probably a tabletop game because
my coding skills just aren't at the
level where I could do everything I
wanted in a video game. And no
publisher? Well, that meant that the
entire budget had to come from my
savings, so it better be something I
really believed in. And while I do draw
a wicked stick figure, I also don't have
a lot of artistic abilities. So, most of
my money was going to go to hiring
amazing artists, a pedigree I've enjoyed
since the early EC days. But, beyond
that, it also meant that I was going to
have to dedicate time to learning about
manufacturing, distribution, marketing,
and editing to get this thing out.
Meaning, I probably didn't want to do a
game like Nemesis, which while awesome,
has 10,000 fiddly bits that I'd have to
figure out how to get made. So, once I
have my constraints, I always try to
write down my strengths and any market
holes that I can see. Luckily for me in
this case, my personal strengths and
marketing holes lined up nicely on this
one. As a designer, I'm strongest at
systems and narrative design. And the
tabletop area I've worked on the most
happens to be card games. Looking
around, there were a million competitive
card games out there, but outside of
Arkham, there just weren't a lot of
co-op campaign-based narrative card
games to be found. So, that's what I
aimed to create. Now, I could start
setting out my design goals. But, what
are design goals? Design goals are the
guiding principles that, when you're
unsure about a design decision, you can
look back at and ask yourself, "Does
this deliver on what I set out to do?"
Simple, yes, but also laying these out
at the start will be a huge help
throughout your design. They should come
from what you've already laid out about
your constraints, your strengths, and
market holes that you found, plus what
you're passionate about as a designer.
For example, I was building Cyberpunk
Legends during the pandemic for those
who longed for those days to be over.
So, I knew I wanted it to be something
that felt like playing an RPG with my
friends, but I knew people's lives would
get busy, so I wanted something that you
could learn in 5 minutes and that you
could pick up and play anywhere without
a ton of setup time. You know, something
you could grab and bring over whenever
people had a minute or, you know, play
at Denny's at 3:00 a.m. Anyway, my
design goals were: low setup time, under
10 minutes, 5 minutes to learn, strong
narrative feel, portable, and co-op.
Great, design begun. Any future
decisions I make now better have a
really good reason behind them if they
negatively impact these goals. So, now
we finally get to what most people would
normally think of as real game design.
But, even there, we start by building
the biggest, broadest elements of the
game that we can. Let's go down the
list. Low setup time. Let's go with no
setup time. Let's have player decks and
a scenario deck, and that's it. Players
will use cards from their decks to
overcome obstacles the scenario deck
presents them. When they get to the
bottom of each scenario deck, they beat
that scenario. Done. Now, what are the
obstacles? How do they overcome them?
No, no, no, no, no. That's future
James's problem. It's important to
remember to start super broad here. Next
up, 5 minutes to learn. Easy. We're
going to make the cardinal rule of the
game be that you flip over the top card
of the scenario deck, follow any
instructions on it, and when you've done
that, flip the next card. This allows me
to put a lot of rules on cards, meaning
you can jump in right away, but as a
designer, I can add as much complexity
or put in as many twists as I want as
you get further into the scenario deck.
Next up, strong narrative feel. Well,
here is really where thinking through
the design implications of the medium
you're working with comes into play.
Because in my case, cards have two
modes. They can provide you with
randomization, and they can serve to
sequence data. Now, I'm going to have
the player cards be randomized, shuffled
up so they have to find novel solutions
to whatever I throw at them every time.
But, the scenario cards? Well, it's hard
to make a randomized narrative very
compelling, but if we have the scenario
decks come in a fixed order, not only
can I control things like the difficulty
curve, but I can use it to craft
narrative moments. I can have a card
that makes you make a narrative choice,
and have it say, "If you chose A, draw
the next card. Otherwise, discard the
next card without looking at it." I can
also create the puzzle aspect of RPGs by
presenting you with a puzzle, and then
having the next card you draw say, "If
you answered the correct answer, draw
the next card. Otherwise, discard it
without looking at it." So,
non-randomized scenario cards. That lets
me get the narrative feel of an RPG.
Portable? Well, that's built in since
there's nothing but cards. But, co-op? I
made the goal that players as a team
have to get to the end of each scenario
deck. So, we're halfway there. But, now
let's give the players a shared life
total. You either make it or you don't
as a crew. Okay, design goals fleshed
out. Now, we have to design a core
mechanic. Here we got a little help. I
showed an early version of this game to
Mike Pondsmith and he said, "We got to
do this with Cyberpunk." So, now we had
a theme, but you always want your core
mechanic to feel like your theme. To me,
Cyberpunk is all about big risks for big
rewards. Gambling your life to become a
legend. It's also about the family you
find and the people you run with. But,
luckily, we're already co-op. So, we
just need to find that feeling of chaos
and risk as a team. So, after throwing
out a half dozen core mechanics, I
looked to poker for inspiration. What if
you had to make a co-op poker hand? I
also wanted the turns to flow quickly.
So, I decided everyone plays one card on
their turn and that when you hit five
cards, we'd check to see what happened.
But, how to integrate that? Well, to
make every combat feel like a wager, I
decided to make it the two hit value on
enemies. You didn't encounter something,
it would have an amount of health,
damage it would do to you if it survived
the round, and right in the middle, a
two hit requirement. Something like two
pair. And if you didn't make the two hit
requirements, you wouldn't do damage to
it. But, to make this work, the player
cards would have to be wild, Cyberpunk
themed versions of standard playing
cards. They had to do way more than just
standard playing cards could. So,
instead of one number and one suit like
normal playing cards, they could have
any number of numbers and suits and
would have a big rules area in the
center to tell you how much damage they
did and any special rules related to
them. Because if the game was to feel
like an RPG, I also needed to make sure
I could make new and interesting cards
for the players to acquire as they grew
their decks and faced later scenarios.
But there was one last thing missing.
Cyberpunk fights are wild and chaotic
and whatever can go wrong will. So I
didn't want players just asking each
other, "I have a five. Do you have a
five?" So I put in table talk rules
saying that you couldn't say numbers,
suits, or card names. But since it was
Night City, I encouraged players to talk
around that as much as possible because
Night City is also about bending the
rules. Then I tested a bunch and then
tested some more and it turned out to be
easy to pick up, strategic yet fast, and
it got people talking. Heck, it even got
non-RPG players RPing a bit. So we had
our central mechanic and with that we
had our core design. The rest is just
content. So for all of you looking to go
from a blank page to a game design, here
are the steps again that made this
process far less daunting for me. One,
list your constraints. Two, list your
strengths. Three, look for a hole in the
market where you can really stand out.
Four, create your design goals around
points one and three. Five, build the
absolute broadest framework of a game
you can that aligns with your design
goals. Six, create a core mechanic that
works within that framework that really
enhances your theme if you've got one
and that really emphasizes your design
goals. Seven, test. Eight, cry. Nine,
rebuild six and maybe five until they're
right. And then once you're there, you
get to do all of the fun stuff. Making
the monsters, writing the story,
creating the characters. And so long as
you go through that list first, they'll
all come together to make a coherent
game. Good luck and design boldly. I
can't wait to see what you create. Okay,
Matt here again with his own words. Uh I
loved this script. I loved everything
about it. It actually has helped inform
me of a couple designs that I am working
on. And I hope that all of you watching
this right now really take this stuff to
heart because it cracked a bunch of
creative roadblocks for me. And uh yeah,
and I'm psyched you all get to use it,
too. Again, Cyberpunk Legends is
kickstarting right now. I have
play-tested it a bunch. It is an
absolute joy to play from start to
finish. Actually, IRL Matt, you got
anything to add? Actually, animated
Matt, yeah, I do. I believe in this game
so much that a few days back I headed to
Indianapolis for Gen Con to help run
additional play-tests because the
original slots sold out in something
like 19 minutes. And it was so fun to
see everyone's eyes light up as they got
to use like the specialty class decks,
work through all the choices, puzzles,
and combat, and came up together as a
crew to shape the outcome of their own
stories. It was awesome. Which again,
you can set up in minutes, learn in
about five, and then dive straight into
the action with no GM required. You
really do have to check this thing out.
Just go to the link in the description
or
Yeah, there should be a QR code that I
just put right there. You will not be
disappointed, and you can trust IRL
Matt. I'm the trustworthy one. Would
Would they let someone who lies wear a
power glove?
Cuz it's
so bad. Well, I can't argue with that.
To check out the Cyberpunk Legends
Kickstarter for yourself, click or scan
here. And then once you've dropped some
eddies, check out our next video here.
Huzzah, friends. Zilliad's
Architectures, Lotus Wolf, Joseph Blame,
Hunter Z, Dominic Valenciana, Arles
Arles Posting, and Angelo Valenciana are
truly the best among us as legendary
patrons.
