One of my most memorable gaming
experiences of the last few years,
happened near the beginning of The
Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild.
So I finished all the tutorial
stuff on the great plateau,
I dropped down into Hyrule, and I
started to head out and explore.
And not too long after that, I trekked up a hill
and noticed a strange shape in the night sky.
What the heck is that?
It looked like a gigantic flaming
dragon, weaving through the moonless sky.
Is that an enemy? Is that
a friend? I have no idea.
I started to run towards it - I didn't care if it
was dangerous, I just wanted to know what it was.
But as soon as I got close,
the blood moon appeared -
that's a mechanic that stops you in your tracks
and resets all the enemies in the world -
and when it finished, the dragon was gone.
It had completely disappeared.
This was like a UFO sighting.
Was that even real? Did that actually just happen?
This experience, well - it gave the
game an incredible sense of mystery.
And that is one of my favourite
sensations that a game can give.
Mystery. The unknown.
The unexplored. The unexplained.
And in the last few years there have been some
fantastic games that really
evoke a sense of mystery.
From Tunic to Outer Wilds, and
from Animal Well to The Witness,
these are games that give players the
opportunity to truly uncover the unknown.
So in this video I'm going
to look at these games - and
plenty of others - to help figure out
the mystery of making a good mystery.
And so if you'll join me on
this trip into the unknown,
I'm Mark Brown, and this is Game Maker's Toolkit.
So: we have to start by asking -
what makes something mysterious?
Well, I think it's about
something being kept from you.
Something being unexplained, unknown, uncharted.
LOST creator JJ Abrams calls it the "withholding
of information, [and] doing that intentionally".
And when it comes to a video game, well, there
are many things we can conceal from the player.
Perhaps the quintessential
mystery is the locked door.
Take the game Tunic - an adorable Zelda-like
adventure about a tiny fox on a little quest.
Throughout this low poly landscape
you'll find locked doors, shut gates,
and other impassible obstacles -
like tombs that are too dark to explore,
and enemies that are too tough to fight.
And at the top of the world, at the very peak
of this snowy mountain, there's a gigantic stone
gateway that towers over your character, and
seems to have no keyhole and no door handle...
A locked door is inherently mysterious because the
player is left to wonder what's behind it
- and to wonder how they'll ever open it.
And we see locked doors
throughout mysterious games.
The imposing gateway to
Sen's Fortress in Dark Souls.
The golden statue room in Super Metroid.
The black egg in Hollow Knight.
And the Moai head in Spelunky's ice caves.
Each one becomes lodged in your head
as you play - an unresolved question
of what's behind the door? And how do I open it?
Tunic designer Andrew Shouldice calls these things
'paths into the darkness', and explains that
"I like having lots and lots of paths
in my head when I play video games.
Lots of loose ends that I'm excited about.
And I think the reason is that
curiosity and speculation is fun".
But you do have to be mindful of how many
locked doors the player is expected to juggle.
Because each one adds to the mental load, and
having too many mysteries can become overwhelming.
Like, in the game Lorelei and the Laser Eyes
there are so many things to keep track of -
so many locked doors, locked boxes,
locked safes, locked clocks -
that you can feel utterly swamped by the secrets.
This was a big concern for Billy Basso
- the designer of Animal Well, who says
"I am conscious of how many things I am dangling
in front of the player at any given time.
It can be fun to tease a player with a
door that is locked from the other side.
But it can be overwhelming to walk into a room
and see six doors connecting to different areas."
So he intentionally limits how
many loose ends you can have in
your head - making sure they're dolled out
slowly throughout the game and the world map.
And he even pulls off some clever tricks -
for instance, instead of having
a locked door between two rooms,
he can have a destructible wall that can
only be blown up from the right-hand side.
This way you still get to create
a shortcut between two areas - but
from the left-hand side, the player has
no idea that there's a pathway at all.
Another thing we can conceal is
the rules of the game itself.
Take Rain World.
A game about a squishy, slug-like cat just
trying to survive in a harsh urban landscape.
While the game starts with a few tutorials -
teaching you how to get food, fill your belly,
and hibernate - the rest is deliberately vague.
You're left to wonder about everything
else: like, what are these symbols and
what do they mean? How do you open these
gates? And what the hell is that thing?
Designer Joar Jakobsson was
inspired by his experience of
being a foreign exchange student in South Korea -
a place where he could barely read
the signs or hold a conversation,
and so felt like a 'stranger in a strange land'.
Rain World beautifully captures that feeling by
being intentionally obtuse - and by refusing
to explain most of the rules of the game.
So playing Rain World feels like exploring an
alien landscape, filled with unknowable creatures.
Where other games might explain every mechanic,
rule, and system through tutorials
and pop-ups, Rain World stays schtum -
knowing that a game is more mysterious
when the player is kept in the dark.
It's not just Rain World, of course.
The Souls games are infamous for their inscrutable
gameplay - whether that's cryptic gameplay stats,
seemingly pointless items,
incomprehensible NPC dialogue,
or bizarre overarching systems like world
and character tendencies in Demon's Souls.
I still don't really know how those work.
And Starseed Pilgrim is another notable example.
This is a game about planting
seeds to grow platforms.
That much is obvious.
But everything else is left unexplained.
What do the different seeds do? How
do platforms interact? What do hearts
do? How do I break out of this loop? And -
most importantly - what is my actual goal?
Developer Droqen says "I never added
clear instructions because I have no
love for those, and I learned that the
world became more interesting that way.
As it turns out, mystery and
wonder are powerful emotions."
But remember - there's a fine
line between something being
intriguing and something being confusing.
Because if you're not careful,
well - consider how Rain World's
standoffish refusal to explain some
of its most fundamental rules means
that a certain number of players are
just going to bounce off and give up.
They'll either seek out a guide,
or stop playing altogether.
I mean, I'll readily admit that it took at
least two false starts with Rain
World before I finally got it.
So it's important to be extremely intentional
about which things you choose to leave unsaid.
Game designer Rune Johansen says
"it’s important to be conscious
about which elements of the game should aim for
usability and which should aim for ambiguity".
You can start with things that are
optional - like how Super Metroid
never explicitly teaches you how to wall
jump or hop up to high places with bombs -
but it also never requires these
advanced manoeuvres to complete the game.
Or focus on things that should
be inherently unknowable - like,
in Rain World, you have to learn about the
various predators through careful observations
of their movements - but it makes sense that you
wouldn't immediately know how an animal thinks.
And, in Zelda, it's understandable that you
wouldn't know the outcome of mixing up various
fantasy ingredients in Link's cook pot - or the
nature of a mythical dragon in the night sky.
Mystery can also come from the landscape.
Consider Elden Ring - a game about
exploring a gigantic fantasy continent.
It's a game of a thousand heavy metal album covers
- like the barren, rot-scarred swamps of Caelid,
the imposing stone walls of Stormveil Castle,
and the underground throne of a dead giant.
Critically, the game tells you
almost nothing about what's over
the horizon - or even what's around the
next corner, or what's inside that cave.
Where other games might give you a detailed map,
or use a compass to point
towards your destination,
or constrain your travels within walls and
barriers, Elden Ring simply lets you explore.
The game's director, Hidetaka Miyazaki,
says "in order to have adventure,
in order to have discoveries,
you need to have some unknowns."
It's not just Elden Ring - mind you.
This is baked into the DNA of the Zelda
franchise, which started out as a way for
creator Shigeru Miyamoto to capture his childhood
memories of exploring the Japanese countryside.
And Riven is all about exploring a
strange world - even down to text
and dialogue being presented
in a made-up fantasy language.
But, again - there's a delicate balance
between giving a player an interesting
landscape to explore, and letting the
player become completely lost and confused.
But instead of spelling things out with detailed
maps - consider letting the player
be the one to chart their adventure.
Let them place down pins, stamps, screenshots,
and notes, just like you would if you
were really exploring a strange new world.
Also - be careful not to undercut the
player's sense of wonder and curiosity,
with a chatty companion character
who over-explains everything you see.
Compare the eerie silence of The Talos Principle,
with the yapping band of explorers in its sequel.
YAQUT: "It should be coming into
view just abou- woah. It's big"
ALCATRAZ: "You can say that again"
MELVILLE: "That is a bloody mega structure"
Yes! Thank you! I can see it myself!!
Finally, we can conceal information
about the game's narrative.
Take Outer Wilds.
This is a game about exploring a simulated
solar system while being trapped in a 20
minute time loop that happens to
reset just as the sun explodes.
And from the very moment the game begins, the
game sets up a number of tantalising questions.
Like why are we in a time loop? What happened to
the previous civilisation? And
what is the eye of the universe?
And then as you explore the galaxy, jumping from
planet to planet, more mysteries are revealed -
from massive celestial secrets like a
teleporting quantum moon; to smaller,
more mundane mysteries like a missing explorer.
Narrative designer Kelsey
Beachum says "at its simplest,
Outer Wilds is a game about finding answers
to questions about the world around you."
Other games built around a mystery include The
Forgotten City - another looping adventure,
this time about time-travelling to a
secret city underneath ancient Rome.
And Her Story - a whodunit detective game about
trawling through a database
of police interview clips.
These games have a tantalising question at the
heart of their narrative - and promise
to answer it by the end of the game.
This turns the entire game into
one long mystery - and everything
you do serves to slowly unravel that enigma.
But designers must ensure that players, well,
even care about unravelling the game's secrets.
Because, well in its final form, I think Outer
Wilds makes players incredibly motivated to go
out and explore - but designer Alex Beachum
admits that it wasn't always this way, saying
"the really hard part was figuring
out how to actually get players
to ask these questions and how
to make them curious - without
us just like beating them on the
head and telling them what to do."
And so he had to employ all sorts of
tricks to spark curiosity in players.
For instance: he found that
he couldn't be too subtle,
as players would only be drawn to things that
were particularly weird - like the quantum
moon - or particularly eye-catching
- like the exploding space station.
And he discovered that players
would be most motivated when
the narrative felt personal and directed at them.
So that's why the Nomai statue
turns to look at you in the museum.
And why the museum's curator, Hornfell,
makes a point of asking you what you want
to do when you get into space - instead
of just telling you what's out there.
Alex has a talk at the Full Indie Summit where he
explains all the tricks he used to make players
curious - find a link to this, and all of the
other sources - in this video's description.
So: we can make a game mysterious by
withholding information from the player.
Perhaps the contents of a locked door.
The rules of the game.
The landscape of a fantasy world.
Or unknown information at the
heart of the game's narrative.
All of these approaches are quite different -
but I think they all serve the same purpose:
by concealing information from the player
they create questions in the player's mind.
What's behind that door? What is that creature?
What's that in the distance?
What happened to the Nomai?
And each question creates a curiosity
gap - that's the space between the
information we're given, and the
information that's being withheld.
Which is a powerful force that can motivate a
player to keep going until
the question is answered.
But how does the player
actually answer the question?
Because in almost any other medium, the
answer to a mystery simply comes from
continuing to read or to watch
until the secret is revealed.
What is the smoke monster? Well,
you'll find out in season five.
Maybe.
But what makes video games great
is that the player can be an
active participant in answering the question.
So in a game with locked doors,
we can ask the player to literally
venture out and find the necessary key.
In a game about a mysterious landscape,
the player closes the curiosity
gap by going out and exploring.
And in a game with obtuse rules, the player can
make sense of it through careful observation,
scientific experimentation, and -
often - a little trial and error.
Spelunky designer Derek Yu says "that is the fun
part about games - discovering things
on my own, making my own mistakes".
But, you know what? If we truly want the
player to feel like they're uncovering
some great mystery - I think we need
to go a little further than that.
So let's go back to Tunic, and that
gigantic door at the top of the mountain.
Because while you absolutely need to find
a shiny golden key in order to open, say,
this door - the mountain door actually
doesn't have a corresponding key.
In fact, you won't find any
item, ability, power-up,
or upgrade that will let you open this gate.
Instead, what you need is knowledge.
Now I don't want to completely
spoil the game, so let's just say...
eventually you'll learn about some special way of
interacting with the game that will
make these stone doors swing open.
Same goes for using these big yellow pads,
or interacting with these mechanical
totem poles, or even upgrading your stats.
All of these things are locked not behind
keys or abilities, but behind knowledge.
Knowledge that you will learn by finding
scraps of the game's super nifty
retro-style instruction manual.
In fact - this game made me so nostalgic for old
manuals that I've made a bonus companion video for
all GMTK Patrons, where I look through some of my
favourite instruction booklets from my collection.
Link in the description if
you'd like to watch that.
Anyway - Tunic's not the only game that does this.
Outer Wilds is all about gaining
knowledge: on each planet you'll
find hints and clues for how to make
progress on another celestial body -
perhaps telling you how to dive
into the depths of Giant's Deep,
or how to make your way through Dark Bramble.
Riven has you paying close
attention to animal noises
and a cryptic numbering system so
that you can open special locks.
And the game Chants of Senaar
is all about untangling a number
of foreign languages so you have
the words to figure out riddles.
Some people have taken to calling this
group of games Metroidbrainias - because
they are like Metroidvanias, only
the keys are stored in your noggin,
rather than in Samus's armour
or in Alucard's inventory.
And if you ask me, discovering these - well,
"knowledge-based keys" is one of the
most satisfying ways to solve a mystery.
Why? Well, for one - they force
the player to pay close attention.
You can't just stumble upon a key and then
bumble into the lock and make progress.
You need to truly understand
the clues you're given,
and apply that knowledge
with purpose and intention.
You have to remember things, or even take notes.
Secondly - when something is locked behind
knowledge, rather than a specific item or ability,
the player can technically answer
that question at any point in time.
For instance - the game
Fez has a made-up language.
And at a later point in the game, the
designer gives you a Rosetta stone,
of sorts, that lets you translate
all of the text into English.
However, some players were able
to use pattern analysis and other
clever tricks to figure out the language...
even without this hint.
And so they were able to unravel Fez's
secrets earlier than most players.
That's a pretty amazing feeling
that leads to more personal stories.
And it allows for replayability and
interesting, sequence-breaking exploits.
And finally - while it can be as simple as, say,
finding a number in one location and then
inputting it into a keypad in another,
these knowledge-based keys can be
so much more involved than that.
Perhaps requiring you to
carefully parse the information,
or combine different bits of knowledge,
or solve some kind of riddle or conundrum.
For instance, in La-Mulana you need to read
these different inscriptions to figure out
the relationship between this celestial
calendar and these massive stone statues.
And in Spelunky, you need to puzzle out how
to use the life-saving ankh if you
want to make it to a special exit.
This adds an extra layer of satisfaction to
proceedings - it's not just "oh, I found a key",
it's "aha, I figured it out!" You truly feel like
you've uncovered a secret, or solved a mystery.
And ultimately, there's no limit to
how cryptic or obtuse these puzzles
can be - perhaps even spilling out
of the very confines of the game.
Or maybe there are secrets that can only
be solved by working with other people.
Like, there's a room in Animal Well that
contains a strange mural that you can draw on.
And skip ahead to the time stamp on screen
if you don't want to be spoiled on this one.
In a secret room beneath the ground, you'll
find a hint for how to draw the correct image.
But, as it turns out, your hint is not enough.
That's because each player is
given just one chunk of the mosaic,
and it's randomly assigned out
of a total 50 possible pieces.
And so to solve this puzzle you'll need
to collaborate with other players - all
pooling individual bits of information and
putting them together to get the real clue.
However - it's important to consider
just how many players will actually
be invested enough to uncover a
game's most tricky conundrums.
So that's why most designers in
this genre have to decide which
mysteries are mandatory to finish the
game - and which are left optional.
For instance - in Fez, you only need to find
32 cubes to open the final door and reach the
credits - but there are dozens more anti-cubes,
artefacts, and other secrets to find after that.
And Tunic has multiple endings - one if you ignore
all the puzzle stuff and just beat the final boss.
And another if you dive into the game's most
cryptic clues, and discover another path.
Animal Well designer Billy Basso
describes his game as having a series
of layers - with layer one being a relatively
straightforward game for everyone to enjoy.
Layer two having more challenging puzzles
for secret enthusiasts to hunt down.
And layer three containing all the most maddening
nonsense that you'll probably need some help with.
Basso says "I think when a game is
hard, it's actually an opportunity
for [players] to bond with each other
and have this shared experience."
And so after all of that - we
finally get the actual answer.
Perhaps it's a handy upgrade,
or some bonus content,
maybe an alternative ending,
or a satisfying revelation.
But to be honest: if the act of
solving the mystery is really fun,
then the answer doesn't particularly matter.
I absolutely loved figuring out
the cryptic game-wide scavenger
hunt to open Tunic's mysterious mountain door.
But I literally can't remember what was behind it.
So the answer doesn't matter too much - unless
it gives away the answer to
the game's other questions.
Here's what I mean by that.
Going back to Elden Ring - the
first time you come across, say,
a catacomb, it's a potent source of mystery.
What is this place? What will I find inside? Well,
the only way to know is to ready
your sword and shield and dive on in.
But then later, you find another catacomb.
And then another.
And another still.
And each one seems to cohere to a strict
template: there are white flowers,
there's a boss, and your reward for beating
the dungeon is almost always a new spirit ash.
Soon enough, the player will
start to notice the pattern,
and can now predict the answer to a question
before they've even had a chance to answer it.
Which essentially robs the
question of its mystery.
So while it's tempting to use a repeating
template to design content - especially if
you're making a massive game that requires huge
amounts of stuff for players to discover - it's
important to make sure players can't
predict the answers to everything.
So this can be achieved by making sure
you also litter in a few completely
unique areas that don't
follow any kind of pattern.
Or by establishing a pattern...
and then intentionally breaking it.
Like how in Super Metroid, the game
establishes that item rooms are safe
places to get a new ability or upgrade - but
then you get the bomb from this room, and...
oh right - I wasn't expecting that! Now
you'll know not to take things for granted.
So - that's it, right? A game can pose
questions - and the player can discover answers.
Well - this neat and tidy
categorisation does miss one thing.
Because for the player to ask a question,
they need to know that something is
being concealed in the first place.
You can only wonder what's behind a door...
if you know that the door exists.
But what if you never actually
show the door to the player?
Well, let's talk about The Witness.
And skip ahead to the timestamp on screen
if you don't want to be spoiled on this one.
So this is a game about
solving back-of-a-cereal-box
grid puzzles on a beautiful Myst-like island.
And those puzzles are pretty neat.
Each batch of head-scratchers is based on some
special rule - perhaps shadows or
symmetry or sound or separation -
and you'll need to figure out the underlying
language of the puzzle design in
order to solve all of the grids.
But - there's more to The
Witness than meets the eye.
Because after hours and hours
of staring at grids and lines,
you'll perhaps start to notice something.
Like, maybe you've climbed all the
way to the top of this mountain,
you look down at the river below and you think...
wait, doesn't that look like one of the
lines I've been drawing on these grids?
And so you press the button
- the one that, so far,
you've only ever used to draw on a grid panel.
Only this time, you're
drawing on the world itself.
And - holy crap! There are puzzles in
the environment! Forget those poxy grid
panels - every path, every flower,
every cloud could now be a puzzle.
This mind-blowing moment of
revelation changes everything.
It turns out that there are questions
that we didn't even know we could answer.
Invisible questions.
Ones that make you ask "what
else is the game hiding?"
Tunic developer Andrew Shouldice says
"my very favourite sort of game is one where as
you play, you don't just find new things in your
path, but suddenly the entire path that you've
traveled becomes littered with question marks."
And it's not just The Witness.
The first time you hit a wall in Dark Souls
and it disappears in a puff of smoke - well,
your entire understanding
of the world just changed.
What else could be hidden behind one of these
illusory walls? Chests? Goodies?
Surely not an entire extra area...
Same goes for realising that you can input codes
into Fez by jamming on the shoulder buttons.
Or that you can escape into the
user interface in Super Mario Bros.,
and run straight past the level goal.
Uncovering one of these mysteries feels like
discovering a true secret
about the world around you.
And for that to be the case,
these invisible questions pretty
much have to be entirely optional.
Something that only certain
players will stumble upon.
The Witness designer Jonathan Blow says "it had
to be legitimately likely that you could
finish the game and never see that stuff.
Like you had to take an extra step of
noticing something on your own to find that."
So: we can make a game mysterious by
concealing something from the player.
It could be a gigantic locked door.
It could be the rules and
mechanics of the game itself.
It could be the landmarks and
layout of a fantasy world.
Or it could be an enigma at the
heart of the game's narrative.
Each one of these things creates
a question in the players mind.
And then by letting the player be the one to
actually answer this question - through discovery,
exploration, observation, puzzle-solving,
or even working with others, the player
gets the incredible satisfaction of being the
one to crack the code, and reveal the secret.
But if we don't even let on that there's a
puzzle to solve - if we just let it sit there,
in the player's view, subtly hinting
that there's more than meets the eye -
we can give the player a true moment of mystery,
as they realise that there's more to this
game than they ever thought possible.
I'm Mark Brown, thanks for watching.
Hey! One more story while we thank the
amazing Patrons who support GMTK every month.
Lemme tell you about the black monolith in Fez.
So this is a giant, imposing stone totem that can
only be cracked open with a very
specific set of controller inputs.
And to this day...
players have never figured out how to open it.
Well. Okay. They actually did.
Players got together and literally brute
forced the thing - trying of thousands
of possible combinations in
a mad, and rather inspiring,
community project - before finally
stumbling upon the right combination.
That's, uh, Down, Down, Left Trigger,
Right Trigger, Right Trigger,
A, and Up, if you were curious.
But the actual intended solution? Like,
how were you even supposed to figure out
that sequence of buttons without brute
forcing it? Well that still isn't known.
And players are still debating it, 12
years after the game's release date.
It's either hidden incredibly well,
or perhaps designer Phil Fish never even
intended to give players a way to figure
it out so the game would always have
one mystery that would never be solved.
The game would always be
just a little bit unknowable.
