Most people who make games, and even
those who play games, if they talk a lot
about games and how they're designed,
have some sort of understanding of what
we mean by game mechanics. When we talk
about a game's mechanics, we're talking
about how it works, how the game play is
produced by the game. I'm Joe Baxter
Webb. In this video, I'm going to define
game mechanics, talk about the
usefulness of game mechanics as a
concept. I'm just going to be telling
you how I personally think about them
and that may be useful to you if you are
making games. Now, this video is going
to get a bit philosophical in places and
it's probably going to be longer than
some of my other videos. So, you know,
watch it in multiple sittings or speed
it up, whatever you need to do to get
through it. Just don't tell me in the
comments like this person did cuz that's
really weird. Why would you do that?
Why? So, to start with, let's just
define what game mechanics are. One of
the issues that I often have when I look
for definitions of mechanics is that
they jumble up mechanics, rules, and
systems. So, we're going to come up with
a definition of game mechanics which
disambiguates these things a little bit.
Let's start with rules because rules are
the underlying logic of a game. Any game
has rules. Whether it's ice spy or
soccer or chess, a game is made up of
rules. Now, the thing that
differentiates a video game from other
types of games is that in a video game,
you can hide rules. When you sit down
and you play a board game with someone
else, the players usually need to be
cognizant of all of the rules, unless
there's like a games master behind a
screen with their own set of rules that
the players don't know about. A video
game allows us to hide some of the rules
from the player. The rules are all of
the logic that make up the game. Any
statement where you could say, "When
this happens, then this happens. and if
this happens then this happens is a
rule. It's the stuff that you turn into
code when you sit down with an idea for
a game and you think when the player
does this I want this to happen. That's
the logical rule and you're just
converting it from human language into
computer language and and that's what
programming is. Mechanics are made of
rules. Rules are the raw material that
mechanics are made up of. But mechanics
are more to do with producing gameplay
itself. Mechanics are the game's
interactions, the things that the player
can do, the player actions, and their
goals. In game design theory, we usually
talk about them in terms of verbs.
Things like jumping, uh finding, uh
avoiding or escaping. Those are verbs
that are kind of more related to the
goal of the player. They are things that
the player can do. They're also things
that the game can do to the player,
which kind of gets us to thinking, well,
is everything a game mechanic then? And
really I would say the game mechanics
are the tools that the players in the
game use to act on the game world in
some way. So if you imagine that your
game has a game master and that game
master that is in the game, whether it's
like a difficulty system or some sort of
enemy AI or something, it's like another
player pushing back against the the
player in the single player game. Both
of those sites are using game mechanics.
They're using their verbs like attack or
collect to change the the simulation or
the game world that they're operating
in. Mechanics are made up of sets of
rules. When you do this, this happens.
[music] If you do this, but this, then
this happens. But not all rules are
necessary mechanics because your game is
going to contain other rules that don't
really relate to gameplay per se. When
we're thinking in game design terms,
mechanics are not about the code of the
game or every part of the game. They're
just about the game play, the the kind
of interactive element of the game. A
mechanic is going to be defined by the
rules that make it up, just like you or
I are defined by our genetics or the
cells in our body. But the specifics of
those rules are going to change the
mechanic considerably. Right? If you
imagine the mechanic of collecting
something, in one game, you're going to
like run into them and your character
just steps on them and then you've got
the coin and it plays a sound effect.
You've collected the coin. In another
game, you might press a button to pick
up a little bag. Uh, in a VR game, you
might use a totally different interface.
So that's an example of like the same
player verb to collect things, but at a
lower level, the rules that make up that
player verb are different. And that
leads to a fundamentally different
feeling in the game. And it's more or
less appropriate depending on what type
of game you're making and what the kind
of overall creative direction of that
game is, right? Like running into big
floating coins in the environment is
going to feel weird if you do it in like
a hardboiled detective game. A thing I'd
like to emphasize here is that how
mechanics feel is really fundamental to
the character of a game. If it's a core
interaction in the game, if it's one of
the main things the player is doing all
the time, like a jump, or it could be
just clicking on buttons in an interface
in a very interface heavy game, if it's
the main thing the player is doing over
and over again, then refining that
thing, it's integral to the game. So
don't treat that stuff as something
superfluous. Because if you're making a
game about jumping, then locking in the
final quality of the jumping very early
on is probably quite important.
Likewise, if you're making a game that
is all about interacting with interfaces
or clicking through dialogue options in
a story, the feel of that is part of the
mechanic. It's part of the character of
the game, and it's important to think
about it early on. Subtle changes in a
rule can change how a mechanic feels
quite dramatically. And this is why when
you are early in prototyping a game, you
need to be open to like switching things
and changing them. You might have heard
this quote from Sid Meer. When you are
testing a variable in a game, double or
have it. It's basically easier to see
the difference that a change in the
rules makes if you make larger
adjustments. When you're making small
tweaks, it usually betrays the
assumption that the rule is close to
perfect when that's often not the case.
It's like prematurely fine-tuning
something when you should actually be
really cranking it in different
directions to feel the change. A system
is a larger set of rules. It can contain
mechanics. The mechanics are usually how
the player interacts with the system.
Right? So, if we imagine a progression
system in a game, like the way that you
collect resources in order to level up,
there are elements of that that are
player mechanics. like gathering XP or
gathering some sort of resource is a
thing that the player can actively try
to do. Opening the menu and looking at
the system and seeing like the skill
tree or whatever it is they're unlocking
their progression through is a mechanic.
There's like an informationbased
mechanic there of the player can go and
look at the thing and understand it. And
then there's also the activation
mechanics of like what does the player
do to actually spend the resources to
unlock another thing. And again, you can
think of all the variations of that,
like forcing a level up at a specific
point in the game, like survivors likes
do, where the game pauses and it's like
now you must choose the next thing.
That's a different way of approaching
the same mechanic which in another game
might say, "Oh, you're ready to level
up. You can do it when you want." Right?
Again, it's going to be more or less
appropriate depending on the game that
you're doing it. Now, when we talk about
systems in games, we're usually talking
about a feature set like progression
system like I just mentioned, traversal
system, how does the player move around?
Can they jump? Can they fly? Can they
climb on walls? But we also need to
factor in all of theformational aspects
of that as well because the way
something is communicated
is part of that system, right? So, the
the menu with the information about how
you level up is part of the system. Like
any interface is part of the system. In
a traversal system, the way that you
decorate a wall to let the player know
that it is climbable, that is part of
the climbing mechanic and it's part of
the traversal system. Another way to
think about it in sort of grammatical
terms is if the game mechanics are the
verbs, what can be done in the game,
then the systems are usually there to
provide the game objects or the nouns
for the player to do those verbs to. So,
the player attacks and defeats a wave of
enemies, right? So attacking and
defeating are mechanics. Uh you attack
by doing particular button presses and
and so on. And you defeat by attacking
with a degree of efficiency, but the
wave of enemies is a an an object within
the game or a set of objects within the
game that comes from a system. And that
system might be regularly spawning
enemies in a wave-based game. Or it
could be the way that the levels are
designed, right? Because your level
design approach within a game, if it's
set levels and it's not procedural,
that's still a system. It's just [music]
more of a human system than a
procedurally generated one. The example
I gave before, the player unlocks an
upgrade. The player is doing something.
They are making a decision. They're
doing some interactions by giving inputs
to the game, and it is operating a
system that exists within the game. A
practical thing here about the
development of systems is that you
probably don't need to build as much of
them as you think you do early on. We
can usually prototype a game by just
pretending the systems there or creating
a sort of mockup of it. So, if we're
making a deck builder, there are certain
systems that we may not need early in
development to do that first stage of
prototyping. We might not actually need
the player to have a different deck
every time. We might not need the
scenarios or situations they're
responding to with their cards to be
different each time. We have an idea of
what the system will eventually be, but
we don't build it prematurely because we
[music] haven't actually felt what it
would be like in action yet. Now, that
will be counter to some good programming
practices. And there's not an easy way
out of that problem. It really comes
down to your own priorities and working
out at any given moment whether the good
engineering is [music] more important or
whether the finding the fun of the game
is more important. Another example that
we see all the time [music] is people
who know they want to make a rogike with
procedurally generated levels and they
pour dozens or hundreds of hours into
learning procedural generation
algorithms and creating a level
generator and they don't actually have a
game yet. They're creating systems
before they know what the mechanics are
which will interact with those systems.
Usually that's quite foolish. There's
probably examples you can find of games
which have been developed in that order
where it worked out. Generally speaking,
if you're doing that, you're not really
developing a game. you are using gamedev
as a technical hobby and you're learning
procedural generation algorithms and
that's fine if that's what you want to
do but it's not how you would develop a
game. A procedural generation system is
part of the machine of a game which is
meant to respond to the problem of how
do we make levels. If you don't have
game mechanics, you don't have a reason
to have levels yet. So [music] again,
it's just about thinking about the the
game as a as a holistic machine and
thinking about which of these parts do
we need to manufacture first before we
see what the other parts need to be. You
know
>> mechanics
[music]
[music]
[music]
things
do see you
[music]
see me do [music]
>> [music]
>> overcoming.
[music]
[music]
Why do we use the metaphor of a machine
in the first place? Because mechanics,
like any theory, are explanatory
metaphor. They are a way of using one
thing that someone already understands
to explain the workings of another thing
that they might not understand. We have
an idea of what machines are and what
they're for. So, we use the metaphor of
a machine to explain video games. That's
good, isn't it? It's good that we can do
that cuz humans are clever and stuff.
One of the issues with thinking of video
games as machines is that it's easy to
make the assumption that it's because
video games are a technology. But every
game or really anything that you play
has game mechanics. Board games have
game mechanics. Tabletop role playing
games have game mechanics. Sports have
game mechanics. You can have verbal
games like I Spy and those have game
mechanics. So the machine metaphor is
not really to do with the fact that
video games are technology. And that
might seem obvious to some of you, but
to others it it might not be. I don't
know. I don't know every single one of
you and what's in your brain. If I knew
that, I would be a very wealthy man.
People use mechanics to talk about how
something works. Like political analysts
will talk about the mechanics of an
economy or government. People talk about
body mechanics if they work in sport
science or medicine or other body stuff.
Talking about something as if it's a
machine encourages systems thinking and
that's one of the reasons why we use it
in game design. It encourages you to
think of the intended outcome. Now you
can have a useless machine that doesn't
have an intended outcome like a Rube
Goldberg machine or the government. Am I
right? But most of the time machines are
created to do a particular thing like a
car engine produces forward motion and a
coffee machine produces coffee. So
applying the same thinking to games, we
can say, okay, there's a thing that we
want a player to get out of this, which
could be being scared if it's a horror
game. It could be feeling clever if it's
a puzzle game. It could be feeling
excited and adrenaline and all of that
stuff if it's an action game. And then
we need to think about which mechanics
or mechanisms are likely to lead to an
interaction that produces that outcome.
Those of you who are already familiar
with MDA theory will know this. This is
what MDA theory is about. You have game
mechanics. They interact dynamically
when the player actually plays with
them. The game exists as a piece of
software, but the play produced by the
game doesn't exist until the player is
doing it. And then that leads to an
aesthetic experience, which means the
player's emotional responses to the
game. Now, MDA theory dates back to a
paper from 2004. But the idea that a
game is a machine that is meant to
produce a particular emotional outcome
is sort of inherent to any time anyone
has ever talked about game mechanics or
game mechanisms. A game mechanic is a
unit of interactivity, a piece of
interactivity within a game. And when
game mechanics are combined, they lead
to specific outcomes. And that is just
like your coffee machine producing
coffee. The horror game produces fear.
The sports game produces excitement and
uh Fiero, the feeling of like triumph
when you beat an opponent and so on. One
of the problems that new developers
often have as well is that because video
games are multimedia,
it's hard to think about the game play
as its own thing. If you don't have this
broader systemic view of like what type
of engine are we trying to build and
what type of experiences it's supposed
to produce, you can fall into a lot of
traps. One of them is the realism trap.
Oh, we're going to make this jump this
high because that's how high a human
could jump. That that doesn't have
anything to do with making a player feel
good or making the player feel like a
particular type of character. One of the
reasons why I personally really like
stylized, less realistic games like
Blood Thief is that the fun is driving
everything else in the game. All of the
decisions about the art. All of the
decisions about how the interaction
should work are driven by the fun and
the particular fantasy of this being
like a very fast like medieval ninja
type scenario. It's all based around
what feels good mechanically. And
generally speaking, as a smaller indie
dev, that's the practical way to make a
fun game. Make a fun set of interactions
and then build a game around it. Don't
create a fictional world and then try to
cram it with mechanics based on, you
know, simulating a life in that world
because you don't know that that's going
to be satisfying to do. Rather, you make
a few mechanics that feel good and let
the art style and the setting all coales
around those mechanics. One small
personal bug bear I have with how we
speak about game mechanics is that we
often talk about them in isolation.
Often when we talk about mechanics in
video games, we talk about a game
mechanic. Like a single game mechanic,
which is kind of detracting from the
usefulness of the metaphor. You know,
like a screw or a bolt or a nut is not a
machine. Just cuz we look at it and we
can see that it's a machine part. It
only starts to gain the kind of
usefulness or sense of purpose that we
associate with a machine by being part
of a machine. You could take a steering
wheel from a factory and say this is a
car part, but it doesn't really become
part of a car until it becomes part of a
car. This is all very like minute
linguistic stuff, but I think it's worth
thinking about. In the tabletop and
board game space, it's much more common
to hear designers and players talk about
mechanisms as the individual units of
gameplay and then mechanics as like the
whole mechanics of a game. It's just
something to think about cuz it will
frame your thinking. some of the most
common things that we see that sort of
lead to a bad game or a game that's not
interesting, copying mechanics and not
really understanding how they work or
the the role they play in the system
they're in. So, you could take mechanics
you like from different games and put
them together and you might end up with
something really good, but you have to
think about the role that the mechanic
is playing in that particular system. To
think of a really dumb example, you have
lots of systems that are to do with
progression in games, like leveling up.
And if you take loads of them and put
them in the same game, they're all sort
of fighting for their role. They're all
trying to occupy the same space in the
design and they don't all need to be
there. Just taking mechanics or systems
you like from other games and mashing
them together doesn't work because you
haven't thought about the role that they
play in those games and the role that
they're meant to play in your game.
Another one that I see quite often is
people taking mechanics from other games
and changing one quite arbitrarily or
because they find it restrictive or they
don't like it in the original game, but
they haven't really understood the
function that it performs. So, one that
I've seen a few times here would be the
deck builder where you don't discard
your hand at the end of the round. Now,
it's probably totally possible to make
that design work, but most of the cases
where I've seen it implemented, it
seemed more like the designer didn't
understand why it's necessary for the
player to discard their hand at the end
of their turn. In most deck builders,
the game really depends on you getting
through all of your cards very quickly.
one set of five cards on one turn and a
different set of five cards on one turn
and then a different set of five cards
and then you've exhausted your deck and
now all of the same cards come around
but in different configurations again
and then in six turns you've been
through your deck twice and each time
you've been through your deck it comes
out in a different order. If you don't
discard your hand at the end of the
turn, then the rest of that system falls
apart. This is kind of how genres work.
[music]
The [music] game shows like systems of
mechanics inside
they let play [music]
so game.
We can experiment, but don't do it for
the sake of [music] no. It's like
cooking up a meal for a guest. Just
throwing [singing] it around.
A video game genre is a prepackaged set
of mechanics that we already know work
together and that we know that a certain
group of players already understand. So
every time you say I'm going to make a
game in this genre, you're kind of
making a promise to the audience of that
genre that they are going to understand
certain parts of the gameplay. If you
take something out, you need to
understand the effect it's going to have
on the whole of the rest of that
machine, right? You can make a
firsterson shooter without shooting it.
But if you do that, the shooting needs
to be replaced with something of equal
value, like a really intriguing kind of
puzzle or some sort of narrative to
uncover. That's where I think the really
practical stuff around understanding
mechanics and how they fit into a game
or how they fit into a genre really
lives. It's one of the reasons why it's
so important to play the types of game
you want to make because playing them
gives you the literacy of understanding
how the thing works and how it produces
a particular type of experience. I know
it sounds really simple, but of all the
people that I speak to, they're actually
actively making games and using game
engines. Not playing enough games or not
playing the type of game they're making
is one of the most common problems.
Chasing a particular type of project
because they think it'll be easy or
because they think that type of game is
popular right now, but they're not
really cognizant of how that game genre
works cuz they haven't embedded
themselves in it as a player. One of the
things about making the transition to
doing game development as a career is
understanding that play is a big part of
that. Appreciation is a big part of
that. That's the reason why there are so
many people working in the indie space
who either were or still are games
critics or journalists. Having that
appreciation of being able to like
deeply engage with a particular game or
a particular genre of games and pick it
apart and think about, you know, why you
like this one and not this one or where
the most fertile soil is in that genre
for experimenting and innovating. You
get that by playing. You don't get that
by hours spent in a game engine. It's a
different set of skills. Another thing I
would like to mention here which is
relevant at pretty much every level of
the games industry from like teams of
500 people to like one person working
alone in their bedroom. Another kind of
element of the machine metaphor we can
think of here that might be useful is
that different studios and different
game developers are like factories which
are attuned to making different kinds of
machines just like factories in the real
world. The reason why a game studio sets
up and then makes lots of sequels of the
same game or makes similar games that
have the same genre formula but are
reskins of the same idea with like
different settings and themes. It's
partly due to the technical debt of like
building a game engine or adding tools
to an existing game engine, setting up
particular asset workflows for making a
certain type of game. But it's also
based on the skills and preferences of
that team. you know, the the creatives
that work on that particular team are
going to be attuned to making a
particular type of game. A lot of the
advice aimed at indie developers on
YouTube specifically about what game
they should make based on the market is
not how game development works and it's
not how business works in most other
sectors either. When you're starting a
small business, you don't usually just
pluck ideas out of raw air for something
that you have no experience with, right?
You're usually trying to align a
perceived gap in the market with
something you know that you can actually
do. The thing that you're most capable
of achieving has very little to do with
like what genre seems to be trending in
the in the slop charts right now. You're
going to have a specific set of
mechanics that you are more aware of how
they work. You wouldn't hire a plumber
to fix your car. Different creatives are
toolled for creating different types of
machines. That's just one other way of
looking at this metaphor of a game being
a machine is that you know different
types of developer or different studio
setups are built for making different
types of engine. Hopefully this has
given you some helpful stuff to think
about about what we mean when we talk
about mechanics and why it's even useful
to think about games in those terms in
the first place. Now, I want to explain
gameplay, which is the thing that our
engine or machine of a game is supposed
to be producing. And I want to explain
game play through the metaphor of
driving a car. Look, I know we don't all
drive, but it's about as close as I can
get to a universal metaphor for how this
all works. Playing a game involves using
controls to achieve a goal. You're doing
a thing to try to get somewhere. When
you play a game, there are some things
that you have direct control over.
They're kind of player verbs in the
game. and there are other things that
you respond to and the game play emerges
out of the relationship between those
things. Likewise, when you drive a car,
there's direct control of the vehicle,
but you're doing it within systems and
circumstances you don't really control.
You don't control the weather. You don't
control the layout of the town. You
don't control the traffic [music] laws
of the country. If you've ever been to a
country that drives on the other side of
the road or has very different traffic
laws, you probably [music] have had this
experience. the first day you're there,
you're like very anxious about not being
able to drive in this new set of rules
and then driving becomes more exciting
because it's kind of harder than driving
at home, but you've got comfortable
enough with it that it feels fun again.
In in game design terms, you can think
about this in terms of like trying to
vary the systems and content around a
player so that they never get bored of
it just being the same thing all the
time, which would be like driving the
same route to work every day. It stops
being a challenge. It stops being
interesting. You just sort of switch off
and it's automatic. We don't really want
our games to get like that. Game play
doesn't begin and end with the verbs and
inputs of the player. Just like it's
insufficient to think of driving as what
the driver is doing within the car, the
experience of driving or going for a
drive is modified very heavily by all of
the things outside of the car. All of
the things that are beyond the driver's
control. Driving is about the thing the
driver is doing within the car and the
things that they respond to. All of
those things [music] impact what it
means to drive or to go for a drive and
what the driver is thinking or feeling
as they do that. Making something for
people to play is about both the
controls that you give them, i.e. the
players inputs into the game and the
context that you put that in, the
levels, scenarios, [music] stories or
systems which the player needs to
navigate and respond to and learn. When
you recognize that gameplay is the
totality of all of that stuff, it starts
to become clearer why it's such a
challenge to make a good game in the
first place and why it's important to
start off small and try and make simpler
machines with fewer components to start
with as well. This is also probably one
of the reasons why so many game makers
start out creating content for other
people's games. Whether it's like level
design using level editors or making
mods or homebrew adventure modules for a
tabletop role playing game that they
play, fanfiction and lore analysis of
existing games. It's simply much easier
to practice a smaller set of skills at a
time than it is to [music] bring every
possible skill together to bear on one
solo developed video game. When you
develop a game, it's like you're
designing a vehicle for a driver to
control, but you're also defining all of
the surrounding laws and geography which
determine how they can drive it and the
destinations they might want to go to.
Whether those are literal environments
or emotional destinations like number
get really really big. This is also why
it's usually a bad idea to try and make
a game which is totally new and unique.
Players don't necessarily want to learn
to do a totally new thing. They want to
take skills they've acquired in other
games they've played and apply those in
a slightly novel context. Take existing
small games in genres that you
understand, clone them to the best of
your ability, add a twist, and then
reflect on whether or not that twist
worked in the way that you might have
expected it to.
Mechanics. So, there's a little bit more
to this driving a car metaphor that I'd
like to explore here. Certain types of
game mechanics which are perhaps
underutilized, misunderstood, and I
would call those expressive [music]
mechanics. There are mechanisms within
the car that you can operate which serve
the primary function of driving, right?
They are to get you to the other place.
You can turn the wheel, you can do the
foot pedals, you can turn the lights on
and off. All of those things are
necessary in order to safely drive the
car from A to B. You also have things on
the dashboard that are more to do with
just modifying how it feels to drive the
car, like turning the radio on, changing
the AC, winding the window down, and
those are comparable to what I would
call expressive mechanics in video
games. Expressive mechanics are things
that don't need to be in the game in
order to play the game. So, they're the
sort of mechanics that you might not
need to include at the prototype stage,
but what they often add really boils
down to the kind of I'm going to sound a
bit cheesy here, but the soul of the
game, the sense of frivolity or
playfulness that that game is about.
This is stuff like, can I pet the cat?
If I roll around in the environment, am
I going to smash boxes even if they
don't have anything in? It's not even
just about game feel, cuz game feel
applies to everything in the game.
applies to the more functional mechanics
as well. You know, like how your jump
and attack and picking something up
feels is really important to the core of
the game. I'm talking about things you
can do as a player which do not help you
win the game in any shape or form. Being
able to change your character's
hairstyle or make them emote or any of
those types of things are comparable to
being able to put the radio station that
you want on in a car. It doesn't
directly impact whether or not you reach
your goal, but it's going to massively
change how you feel about it. In all of
the time I've been running this channel,
reviewing and critiquing work in
progress indie games, I've tended to
find that these little kind of more
frivolous expressive mechanics like can
I whack the bobblehead in the car tend
to be the things that make up the
difference between a game which is quite
good and a game which is excellent. In
game studies, we often use the theorist
Kwis to steal his spectrum of play,
which ranges from Ludus to Pa. And Ludus
is types of play according to strict
rules. Like when you're playing a board
game or a sport, there's a strict set of
rules to how the game is played. Whereas
pa is more the free form kind of play.
So pa is what we're thinking about when
we use phrases like messing about or
playing around. Most video games contain
the possibility of both of these types
of play, probably to the point where
most players expect them to. [music] So,
if your game feels a bit bare bones, it
might be because there's too much play
and not enough playing around. I'm not
necessarily saying that you should make
a a game with no goals and no rules and
no challenge that is purely cosmetic and
all dress up and has no player agency in
it. I also wouldn't suggest going for
these expressive mechanics before you've
worked out what the core mechanics of
your game are, like the the main things
the player is doing, but it's those
small expressive elements that often
make a game appealing or memorable.
Those are the sorts of things that when
you show your game to an audience, they
are going to stick out and and remember
your game by letting players be a bit
goofy, be a bit silly, jump around on a
desk, those are the things that make one
game particularly more memorable than
another game. Anything that lets the
player leave some sort of mark on the
world or customize something. Anything
that lets the player role play or make a
taste based decision or leave a mark on
the world in some way that is not
acknowledged by the game systems or
doesn't need to be acknowledged in the
game system can really help to make the
player feel involved and to give the
game that sense of playfulness and
frivolity which makes the player want to
come back to it, draws them back to it.
On a more pragmatic level, thinking
about marketing games is those small
things that players are likely to
recognize as attention to detail. If
your game seems quite bare bones, then
players will look at that and they'll
think, "This developer isn't very
technically skilled. They just did this
because that was what they could do." If
they look at your Steam page and they
look at your socials and they see that
you're filling your game with
delightful, silly little interactions
that are functionally meaningless in
terms of the game play, that kind of
builds trust because it shows them that
doing those little things is no big
effort to you. Building an audience for
anything is about the little things.
It's about how much effort and energy
you put in to the little things that
kind of intrigue and delight people.
Building a relationship with an audience
is just like building any kind of human
relationship. And by that I mean it's
about the little things and it and it's
also about the big things. It's about
all of the things of different sizes.
Maybe it's not about the medium things,
but it's definitely about the small
things and and the big things.
I hope that clears things up.
The last type of underrated game
mechanic that I really want to call out
quickly here would be mechanics of the
mind or cognitive mechanics. We have a
genre now called walking sims. It's a
silly name. I would prefer to call them
something like environmental narrative
games. You go around in a place and you
learn about what happened there by
picking up objects and reading things
and so on. The name sarcastically given
to [music] these games implies that they
are games about walking. As an observer,
you look at these games and you think
that is all the player is doing here.
But what the player is doing is [music]
just a lot of it is in their own head
and it doesn't translate to button
presses or events that you can see on
the screen. That doesn't necessarily
mean that nothing is happening. The
player is doing something. It's just
they're [music] doing it in their head.
That is the experience that is coming
out of the game. So the thing that the
player is doing in their head is a game
mechanic because it's a thing that the
game designer gave the player to do. The
player is doing something. They are
judging or deducing something about a
situation presented to them in the game
world. They're just not doing that by
like running up and pressing loads of
buttons and trying to decipher a code
and unlock a door, which is how we
normally think of video game puzzles.
But they are doing an activity given to
them [music] by the game designer and
that is producing their experience. So
it's a game mechanic. This is the reason
why so many visual novel type games
position the player character as a
detective or a journalist or someone
like that. It's to prime you to observe,
investigate, and to make judgments.
These are still game mechanics because
they're the things that the designer
gives the player to do. So, if you're
making a game which is mostly or
entirely about story, I'd encourage you
to still think about the player verbs
that you're designing for, even if
they're not represented in in-game
actions. A dating sim is about judging
characters in order to ascertain which
one you like the most and then
navigating the conversations around
that. If you're making a very story
focused game, you still [music] need to
think about what is the player doing.
Even if the thing that they're doing is
predominantly a cognitive verb like
noticing things, remembering things,
judging people and situations, the
player is still doing something. And how
good your story game is going to be will
be based on how well it encourages
players to do that thing and the kind of
interesting situations you throw at them
which get them to do those cognitive
verbs. More broadly, what I'm saying
here is that some game mechanics are
much more heavily weighted to what is
going on in the player's head than what
is going on in their hands or on the
screen. Lots of puzzle and strategy
games involve a much higher ratio of
thinking to doing. Consider a strategy
game. You might look at stuff in the
game and make loads and loads of little
judgments and then that all culminates
in one click in the interface. Strategy
games encourage players to put a lot of
thought into a single action. That
that's historically why we use clocks
for chess. We want to limit the amount
of time that players get to think about
their next move or it will just go on
forever. The top level game design thing
to think about here is that some of the
most powerful verbs in your game might
not be ones which directly map onto a
specific set of button presses. There
are going to be stuff going on in here.
I hope this has given you lots of things
to think about or encourage you to think
about things in some new ways. I don't
make video essays like this to give you
neatly actionable advice on what to do
with your career or how to approach your
hobby projects. If you're making an
indie game, that's fundamentally a an
entrepreneurial activity and one that
requires you to think like a leader and
not a follower. And that is precisely
why a video like this is more a kind of
set of thought exercises. Here's some
things to think about about this topic
rather than 10 top tips to make your
mechanics more good cuz I know that
would be better for the algorithm, but
it's not what I'm interested in doing.
And I don't think it's the sort of thing
that produces good game design thinking.
YouTubers are encouraged by the
algorithm and encouraged by the fact
that the largest audience is the
beginner audience to [music] wrap game
design theory up as neatly packaged
advice on exactly what to do because
that's what the largest possible
audience wants. It's not the most
algorithm friendly thing. I'm never
going to be able to retire purely on ad
revenue from YouTube because what I'm
doing here is aimed at intermediate
learners and and people that really want
to learn how a game designer thinks.
Thanks for staying to the end. I hope
you got something useful for it. And if
you're new to the channel and you'd like
to see or hear more of this kind of
thing, please subscribe and maybe even
consider supporting us on Patreon. And
in the meantime,
please drive safely.
[music]
Heat. Heat.
[music]
>> [music]
>> Black.
[music]
[music]
[music]
>> [music]
[music]
>> Heat.
Heat.
[music]
>> [music]
[music]
>> Heat. Heat.
[music]
Heat.
[music]
[music]
Heat. [music]
>> [music]
[music]
