Let's talk about how to make anything
fun in games, in education, and in life
as a whole. I'm a full-time indie game
developer. I make indie games for a
living quite successfully. So, people
think my games are quite fun. And I also
made this video about 6 years ago where
I talk about fun, which almost got a
million views. Let's see how my theories
have changed since 6 years ago. So, what
I think now is that fun is essentially
the reward for making good use of your
brain. Your brain is very expensive.
While it only makes up 2% of your body
weight, it uses up 20% of your energy.
No matter how hard you're thinking or
what you're doing, it's always roughly
the same. If you're not making good use
of the brain, then all of that energy is
essentially going to waste. There's
boredom on one side, which means you're
not making good use of your brain, and
there's frustration on the other side,
which also means you're not making good
use of your brain, just in a different
way. This is basically through
underwhelm, and this is through
overwhelm. and they prompt you towards
seeking out more fun essentially. Right
now, this entire framework is not
exactly new. There's already someone who
summarized it quite well in 1990 um
which is in the book Flow by Mihi
Chicken Mihi. So, a lot of what you're
going to hear in this video is going to
be based on this book plus a bunch of my
own theory crafting on top. So, even if
you already know this book, you're going
to hear a bunch of new things in this
video. No worries. And in particular, I
want to talk with you about games, about
education,
and about life. How to make those more
fun. All right, you're fully set up.
Let's dive right in. So fun is making
good use of your brain. But what does
that mean exactly? What exactly does
good use mean? And I think there are two
useful things you can do with your
brain. One is learning and one is
executing. So learning would be gaining
skills and knowledge and executing would
be applying skills and knowledge. And
these map very cleanly to a very common
dilemma that once you know it, you kind
of see it everywhere. And that is the
explore versus exploit dilemma. So
explore means you eat the strange
looking berry that you have never seen
before. And exploit means you eat the
familiar berries that you already know
taste well. Exploitation means you
immediately get something tasty. You
fill your tummy with something that you
know is good. explore is more risky.
It's a potential reward later. This is
either going to taste well or or it's
not. If the explore activity goes well,
then it's essentially moved over to the
exploit pile, right? Then if we play the
exploit strategy in the future, then we
have more berries to eat because we we
now know this tastes well, this tastes
well, and there's always going to be
some new berry we can try and explore.
and maybe we'll throw up or maybe we'll
add it to our exploit pile. And now you
can already see that in order to
maximize what you get out of it, you
have to play some mixture of those
strategies. If you never explore, you're
not going to have a lot of food to
choose from. If you only explore, you'll
end up throwing up way too often. So
some some mixture between those two is
the sweet spot. Exploitation is useful.
An explorer is kind of indifferent about
being immediately useful and that's what
makes it useful. Fun does not care about
being useful. That is what makes it
useful. And that is because of course
fun is an explore activity. Explore and
exploit maps very cleanly to learning
and executing. For example, as a game
developer, you can either choose to keep
using the game engine and the tools you
already know or you can take a little
bit of a risk and try learning something
new. Maybe it will maybe it will pay
off, maybe it will not pay off. Explore
and this is exploit. And both of them
are useful ways to engage your brain.
Both of them them can be quite fun. But
especially learning I would say is
particularly fun. It's also not always
possible to draw this line here.
Sometimes they mix a little bit, right?
Often when you apply your skills, you
improve them, you learn new things and
vice versa. Also, now if learning is
supposed to be so fun, then why is it
that I don't like learning? Learning I
don't think learning is very fun. Uh I
think your theory is just completely
wrong. I I hate learning.
So, well, fun doesn't care about being
useful or being immediately useful, but
it does care about one thing and that is
a good learning environment. Believe it
or not, I don't think school is a very
good learning environment. I just look
at it. You have a grumpy teacher
teaching you silly things in like a
cramped classroom where it's hard to
focus. It's it's not not a very good
learning environment. Let's let's be
honest here for a second, okay? And
let's compare that to video games. You
have your peace and quiet. You have the
ability to focus. You have a good
learning environment. You can restart
easily. You can adjust the difficulty to
your needs. These are much much better
learning environments and that's why
they're more fun. Let's think about
learning an alien language. For example,
you have one book that's just completely
written in alien language. Uh it's not a
good learning environment. Not very fun
to learn the language with that, right?
Then maybe you have another book that
has translations
in it already. That's okay. That's an
okay learning environment. That already
makes it a little more fun. But then
check out this game, Chance of Sennar.
It's a really nice game. And essentially
what it does is it teaches you a bunch
of alien languages and you also have to
figure out the languages yourself.
Essentially, you have to figure out what
each word means. This was by far my
favorite way to learn a language ever.
Um, you can kind of see you have to
figure out the language from the context
in the world. Here you have a bunch of
depictions and some writing below and
you have to basically decipher what all
of these words mean. A good learning
environment is the best predictor for
fun. If you would take away one thing
from this video, then let it be this. If
you have a good learning environment,
that is the best predictor for fun. Ew,
bad learning environment.
Okay, learning environment, best
learning environment, therefore most
fun. Understand? Very good. Very good.
So, I was on a podcast where I basically
already pitched this theory and this was
one of the comments. I love Jodis and
the pure German answer about fun. If I'm
learning efficiently, I'm having fun.
Um, yeah, that's basically what it comes
down to. But also I was uh very curious
to see that I'm not the only one who
came up with this theory before. There's
also seems to be a book by Ralph Costa,
a theory of fun for game design and his
central thesis is essentially also that
fun equals learning. So obviously I
bought the book. I had a look and indeed
that seems to be the main point. Even
though it's described maybe a little
differently than from what I would
describe it, but still um I only found
out about this while I was already
working on this video. Still very fun to
see that I'm not the only one who
connected the dots there. Cuz also in
the original book that this video is
based on, Flow by Mihi Chicken and Mihi,
what I noticed is that everything he's
describing in in the book Flow is
essentially just a good learning
environment. And we'll get to more more
into depth about that later, but this
interesting observations right here. One
thing that pisses me off about um
education, let's gamify education to
make it more fun. Let add unlocks,
rewards, and mechanics. Yes.
And then they figure out it's still not
fun. And I think the problem is that
they fail to realize that learning is
already fun in a good learning
environment. So it's not like you have
to gamify education. It's already fun if
you do it well. Well, they're like, "We
need to gamify education." uh but always
has been always has been fun. You just
need to do it well enough. So learning
is already fun in a good learning
environment. No need to gify for that.
Okay. And one thing that adds to that
confusion is that I think people often
mix up fun and motivation. And it's it's
difficult because people have different
definitions for everything. But I think
it's very useful to differentiate
between fun and motivation. I think fun
maps to the explore strategy whereas
motivation maps more to the exploit
strategy. Fun is something you do for
the sake of it and without the need for
an immediate reward whereas motivation
is something usually you do to seek out
an immediate reward. So to exploit what
you already know. So fun maps to
learning and motivation maps more to
execution. And usually everybody who
talks about gamification
is usually talking about this side of
the equation about motivation,
exploitation, and basically creating an
incentive for people to execute on what
they already know. But I I think the
real treasure trove is actually over
here. Gamification people, why are you
so focused on this? Have a look this
way. Just make a better learning
environment and that will automatically
make it more fun. Now, obviously fun and
motivation, they kind of go together.
For example, video games, they typically
make good use of both. They're fun, but
they're also motivating. And often
times, for example, when there's a
little bit of a drought in fun, maybe
you can make up for it with motivation.
For example, if like the game is getting
a bit stale, maybe you can motivate
people through that dip with by saying,
"Oh, look, you're going to unlock this
and that." So, the two can definitely
dance together. and they probably
should, but it's still important to
realize that they're different things.
However, one thing that you can say
maybe is that fun is perhaps an element
of motivation, right? So that fun is
basically a bubble inside motivation. So
there are a bunch of different
motivation sources and fun is one of one
of them. That I think would be fair to
say. So the same way hunger prompts you
to eat, thirst prompts you to drink,
lust prompts you to reproduce, fun
prompts you to learn. So there are a
bunch of different motivations that want
you to do different things and fun is
one of them. What we're mostly going to
talk about in this video though is fun.
Motivation is a little bit of a
different thing and we could definitely
fill an entire video just about that.
Probably that would be too much for this
video. A good learning environment is
the best predictor for fun. This raises
the question, what is a good learning
environment? And this is where we get to
the book flow by mihi. This is basically
what he describes in his book. One
requirement is frequent and fast
feedback. One is deep focus and one is a
challenge that matches your skill. And
there's another one. I think it was
clear goals. However, um I think that's
more of a sub point of something else.
First of all, let's have a look at
frequent and fast feedback. Feedback
means you input actions and the world
returns some kind of feedback. Data in,
data out. Basically, if you want the
abstract version of that and then the
world processes the data in some way and
then you in your brain process the data
in some way and you are in interaction
with the world and you exchange
information input and output or from
your perspective I guess this the input
whatever this is this is the feedback
this is the feedback you get from the
world this is what you want to be
frequent and plentiful so that you can
learn efficiently.
Learning means improving your ability to
predict world outputs based on specific
inputs. That's a technical way to put
it, I guess. Or to predict the best
input based on a desired output. So it
all comes down to basically learning the
world, understanding the world, building
an internal world model so that you can
make predictions about which input data
you need to give to receive the output
data that you want or to just predict
the output data even without you doing
anything. So you're building a world
model to make predictions. Explore means
you're improving your world model.
Exploit means you're making useful
predictions about the world. How do you
build a world model efficiently? Well,
you need frequent and fast feedback.
That that's what it comes down to. And
that data needs a good signal to noise
ratio. This is incredibly important. So
noise means basically junk information,
junk data that's not useful for
learning. And then the signal is
basically the actually useful part of
the data that you can use to learn from.
And that's I think exactly where goals
come in. Clear goals help you to cut
through the noise. So if if you're
receiving a bunch of noisy feedback data
from the world, then a goal is what
basically helps you identify what you
should pay attention to. So the goal
says this is what you should care about.
This is the feedback you should care
about. At the same time, it also helps
you receive better feedback from your
world model because you can estimate the
distance from the goal if there's a
goal. And that gives you very frequent
feedback because you always have roughly
an idea of how far you think you are
from the goal. And that is extremely
dense and frequent feedback that you
receive from that.
Do we need the input at all? So the
input to the world that is do you need
to give the world any data at all? I
think that's actually not the case. This
is fine, right? cuz you can still try to
predict what data you're going to
receive and then confirm it. This like
an internal game that you're playing
with yourself. And for example, large
language models also learn this way. If
you only take the pre-training, right,
we basically consume the entire internet
and we try to just predict the next
token, the next verge that comes in. And
I think this is also kind of how humans
learn. Um, when you watch a video like
this one, for example, you kind of maybe
predict what I'm about to say and then
the things that most surprise you are
the things that you remember most and
that most impact your world model. And
otherwise, you just confirm and you're
like, "Yeah, I knew that. I was right
about that." And that's sort of how you
build your world model, right? Watching
videos passively doesn't require you to
input anything. It's just a passive data
stream that reaches your brain. And if
it's engaging enough, then it's kind of
fun to just model in your brain. So I
think fun would be this two directional
thing. Fun is when you input data and
you receive feedback from the world.
Whereas engaging, engagement is this one
directional way of fun where the world
gives you data and you play the game
internally in your head essentially. If
you want to copy my definitions because
as mentioned people define things very
differently but if you want to copy my
definitions then this would be engaging.
Fun is a good active learning
environment and engagement is a good
passive learning environment if you
will. So that covers frequent and fast
feedback aka fun or frequent and fast
data you receive from the world aka
engagement. And the next point would be
deep focus. There are four requirements
you need to focus. I would say one is to
reduce distractions. One is to reduce
disruptions and task switching. So if
you're playing and mom comes in and asks
you what you want for dinner or if
you've done your homework already, that
is a disruption.
Whereas your phone and clutter and
whatever, that is a distraction. And
then there's also another term that's
sometimes used which is extraneous load.
So that means all of the noise and
clutter and the in the way the data is
presented itself essentially. And then
last but not least we have a bunch of
physical chemical health factors like
are you getting enough oxygen and water
and sleep and sunlight and so on. And
that's the only outlier. All of the
other ones can basically be summarized
as the same thing. All of the other ones
are essentially just improve signal to
noise ratio. Right? that you have a
bunch of noise, a bunch of unnecessary
data that doesn't isn't really useful
for you. The signal is the actually
useful information and you want to get
rid of the noise and keep the signal.
That that is what focus really means
having a goal maybe so that you can um
better filter through the noise. If you
have a look here, distractions,
disruptions, extraneous load, all of
those are about signal to noise ratio
essentially. And last but not least, you
need a challenge matching your skill.
This is where our famous flow chart
comes in. I use the words flow and fun
pretty interchangeably. I think they're
more or less the exact same thing. It's
kind of like think that naming your book
flow sounds a bit more fancy than naming
your book fun. I think they're pretty
much the same thing. Here we have a
graph where skill is on one side and
challenge is on the other. So this is
the skill of the player or the skill of
the person and this is the challenge
they're presented with. And if the
challenge matches the skill perfectly,
then we're in the flow channel in the
middle here. If the skill is much larger
than the challenge, then we're in this
boredom section. This is when we're
bored. And if the challenge is much
greater than the skill, then we are
frustrated. And the quality of this flow
channel is that this is basically the
channel where we're learning
efficiently. But why is that? Why is it
that we're only learning efficiently
here? Uh why are we not learning
efficiently when we're bored? Or why are
we not learning efficiently when we're
frustrated? This nobody has ever
properly explained to me. So I had to
come up with my own theory. And I think
I think I came up with a pretty
reasonable one. Why is the flow channel
the flow channel? Why is this most fun?
Why is this uh where we learn the most?
I think the answer is it has the best
signal to noise ratio. Once again, if
you think about being frustrated,
basically the feedback you're receiving
from the world is you are doing poorly
poorly poorly poorly poorly poorly
poorly poorly poorly poorly. And so no
matter which action you take, no matter
what you do, you're always receiving the
same feedback. And as as you can see,
there's nothing to learn from. So if
you're taking different actions but
everything has the same outcome that is
the definition of frustration
essentially and it means you're not
receiving any useful data from the world
and your brain is telling you what the
heck I'm not learning anything useful
from this stop it. And the same goes for
boredom. Boredom means you're so good or
you're so far ahead that no matter what
you do, no matter what you try,
everything kind of works. So you're
doing well well well well well well. So
this is kind of like having a chess
opponent that intentionally tries to
lose and so no matter what you do you
always win and your brain gets very
bored by that because anything you do
leads to a win. Everything works and as
you can see there's like also there's no
data to learn from. So the only way to
learn is actually in this flow channel
in the middle here where some of the
actions you take don't work and some of
the actions you take do work. And now
from that you can learn which actions
work and which actions don't work. That
is why the flow channel exists and that
is why here we have the most fun. It's
as simple as that. It's I think it's a
really good explanation for for why the
flow channel is the flow channel. you
want want to be here and the flow
channel is basically like an elevator.
It carries you up up upwards definitely
carries your skill upwards and then
hopefully the environment uh increases
the challenge appropriately so that you
stay in the flow channel and can keep
climbing this ladder. Now the brain's a
bit more complicated. It can either be
underwhelmed, overwhelmed or it can be
in flow. It's like managing your mental
load. But your brain is not just one
container. It has a bunch of smaller
containers for a bunch of different
skills. I think this is partially even
biologically correct, right? So, the
brain does have different brain regions
that are responsible for different
tasks. But I think even if it's not bi
biologically exactly correct, it's still
useful to think about it this way. Your
brain has capacity for different skills
at the and doing different skills at the
same time. Maybe those are a little
flexible. Maybe sometimes brain regions
overlap and can do different things and
so on. Like reality is more messy, but
as an abstraction, I think this is a
good way to think about it. And for
example, your eyes can be in flow when
there's like the correct amount of
challenge for them, whereas some other
part of your brain can be overwhelmed
where some other part of your brain can
be bored. And this can all happen at the
same time, right? Your your hands might
be bored, but your eyes are engaged and
your ears are engaged, but your
navigation skills are unused and sitting
there idle and bored. This is kind of
the way I would think about it. So
sometimes, uh, I sing in the shower.
Just being in the shower is kind of too
boring, right? Just being in the shower,
it uses up a bunch of my skills, but
none of them enough to properly get into
the flow state. So, by singing in the
shower, I get to add an extra challenge
on top that gets some of my skills into
flow state. And for example, sometimes
when I go for a walk, I pick up little
sticks and play around with them in my
hand and so on. And this is all to
basically increase the challenge and get
me closer to flow state and to engaging
my brain fully. A good signal to noise
ratio makes for a good learning
environment. Unless, and there's one
very interesting exception, unless
filtering through the noise is what you
are trying to learn. And this is
particularly true for your eyes and your
ears or more more precisely your the
brain regions in your brain that are
responsible for u analyzing that
incoming data from your eyes and ears
and senses and so on. They receive a lot
of noise, your eyes and ears especially,
right? And that is why for video game
development, the early prototype
blockouts, they look boring because
there's not enough noise to filter
through. Like filtering through the
noise is the challenge for the eyes. And
this is this is so easy to make sense of
this, so easy to filter through that
your eyes are just utterly bored by
looking at it. where something like this
is like complete AI generated chaos
mumbo jumbo nonsense. You know, this is
an ex segoration, but some games get
very close to that. That is very
frustrating for your eyes to look at
because you have you can't really
understand all of this. There's so much
noise that cutting through the noise
becomes extremely extremely difficult.
So something that would look very
pleasant would be somewhere in between
where your eyes are perfectly in flow,
where there's like some noise to filter
through but not too much. Similar thing
for your listening skills, right? When
you're young, when you're a kid, you
like listening to songs like Five Little
Ducks,
whatever. And that's like super flowy,
engaging for you. Uh, but then as you
get older, your skill increases. And so
now you want to listen to more
complicated things that have more noise,
more patterns to make sense of. So then
you want to listen to maybe something
more complicated like
So the challenge for your senses is very
much to cut through the noise to make
sense of the noise and that can be very
fun. All right. So, we have our brain
with a bunch of different skills, and
each of them can independently be bored,
frustrated, or in flow. Maybe you've
seen this in movies recently where
characters spell everything out. I am so
angry. I'm literally shaking right now.
Shh, quiet. I'm calling Hannah right
now. And we can see what you're doing,
but you're still spelling it out, right?
And then the other person spelling
everything out again. They even Yeah,
you get the idea. And the reason for
this is because um the people who make
these shows and movies, they assume that
you're watching them while you're doing
something else. They assume you're
watching this while you're doing your
laundry. And they know that doing your
laundry is already taking up a bunch of
your brain capacity and you're already
using up that brain capacity. So the
only thing they do is they fill up what
they think might be missing from that.
So they give you a little bit of
listening skill, a little bit of
language skill, and hope that that gets
you into flow state. And if you're doing
both things at the same time, then
there's a good chance it will indeed get
you into flow state. But that leads to a
strange phenomenon that once you're
watching these TV shows on their own
without doing anything else, you're
quite bored by them because there's not
much left. It's not challenging enough
on its own. So now you need to start
doing something else. Maybe you need to
scroll on your phone at the same time to
get back into flow state because the
film on its own is just not enough.
You're always trying to fill up these
containers. That's what you do.
Obviously a lot of people also watch
YouTube like this, right? Maybe you are
watching this YouTube video while doing
something else to get you into flow
state while doing the dishes or or
whatever, right? That's how it works.
You want to be in flow state. And one
very interesting thing in the case of
like films and movies in particular or
stories in general is that if you're
bored, you're confused like where
where's the challenge? Where's the
challenge? And the funny thing is that
if the challenge is too high, then you
might not even realize where the
challenge is. So if the challenge is too
large, you might also be uh bored. You
might feel bored even though it's too
difficult because you don't understand
the challenge. you don't even know that
there is a challenge. So, if you watch a
film that's way over your head and you
you just don't just don't get it, you
might be bored even though it's actually
um too difficult for you, not too easy.
That's an interesting phenomenon. You
see this in other ca in other scenarios
as well. I think I'll have another
example for this later, but this is
interesting that sometimes this can
happen. Understanding the challenge is
also a challenge. So if the challenge of
understanding the challenge is too
difficult, that means you don't see the
challenge. And misunderstanding the
challenge often ruins the experience.
This is an interesting phenomenon and
answers one question that I know you're
interested in cuz you've asked in the
comments and that is like what's going
on with um rage games and like really
difficult games like Souls games or like
like literal rage games like Getting
Over It and so on. Why do people play
those? Clearly, those are not fun,
right? It's like they ask you for way
more mechanical skill than you have. So,
they're deep into frustration territory
for almost every player. Why do people
play them?
Why? And I think um if you're thinking
about the games this way, then you're
probably not going to like them.
Actually, if you think they're about
mechanical skill, chances are you're not
really going to like these games very
much cuz I think they're actually about
something else. I think they're about
perseverance. Personally, I think um you
need to reframe the challenge to
perseverance
and to being able to learn in a hostile
environment. So being able to learn in a
hostile environment is the skill that
you are trying to master in these kinds
of games because let's be honest they
are very they're not good learning
environments. For example in getting
over it if you make one mistake you fall
all the way back to the bottom. That's
not necessarily what I would describe a
good learning environment like right a
good learning environment would have a
lot of checkpoints or you can retry
exactly the parts that you failed on and
so on. So these intentionally are not
very good learning environments. But if
you reframe the challenge as a
perseverance challenge and a challenge
about learning and persevering despite
the hostile environment, then I think
these games are actually quite fun. Um,
if they meet your skill level and
they're much more likely to meet your
skill level with this challenge than
they are with your mechanical skill, if
that makes sense. So, I do think these
games are fun and I think people play
them for fun. And obviously, some
streamers and so on don't play them for
fun. They play them for clicks. That's a
different story, right? Sometimes the
streamers you see playing these, they
they suffer quite a lot. They dig
through a lot of frustration. But then
once again, persevering through the
frustration is kind of the fun here. So,
who knows? The point I'm trying to get
at is that enduring discomfort is also a
skill that you can kind of try to
master. Let's say you go swimming with
your friends on a lake. There's like the
boring guy who's like swimming at the
top and he's like just chilling here.
One guy is trying to hold his breath
under water just for fun. It's
uncomfortable, right? That that's
something to take note of here. Holding
your breath underwater is definitely not
comfortable. it's uncomfortable and you
can still do it for fun because learning
to be uncomfortable is a skill that you
can try to master. But then if somebody
comes along and just holds you under
water, then that's definitely
frustrating. If they hold you,
especially if they hold you for longer
than you're comfortable being
uncomfortable with. Similar thing for
exercise. Exercise is quite fun even
though it's not comfortable, right? You
can be the boring guy on the couch. You
can go for a run, put yourself into flow
state, or you can way overdo it and make
it like very frustrating for yourself.
Or you can eat something spicy. Yeah,
right. You can be Tim. You can not touch
the chili pepper. You can be the boring
guy. You can be Toby. You can eat
something very, very spicy and kind of
have fun with it and kind of challenge
yourself. Or you can be Fred and you can
way overdo it and basically fear for
your life after you swallowed all of
those chili peppers whole. So that would
be frustration territory. So basically
all of these examples what I want to get
at is discomfort can indeed be fun. You
need to practice discomfort and nature
wants you to practice discomfort because
um you will not always be comfortable
and you need to be able to be uh you
need to be able to deal with discomfort
in real life and exploration is always
doesn't have to be immediately lo use
useful but exploration is a way still to
prepare you for potential situations to
come right. Yeah. But the good news is
discomfort can indeed be fun. That is
fantastic. So fun does not need to be
comfortable and it also doesn't need to
be directly useful. That's what we
already talked about about earlier. Uh
fun not being directly useful is is what
makes it useful. And now what we added
is it also doesn't need to be
comfortable. Fun just needs a good
learning environment for whatever.
That's literally all it cares about. So
if we add discomfort to our vin diagram
here and would sit somewhere like here,
right? A lot of motivations have to do
with discomfort. For example, being
hungry is a kind of being dis
uncomfortable or being thirsty is being
is a way of being uncomfortable. A lot
of things you do are based on being
uncomfortable, but this a discomfort
blob does overlap with a fun blob.
There's quite a bit of overlap here, I
would say. So, when you go for a run,
then your skill of being uncomfortable
is in flow state, maybe. and all your
other skills, they might still be bored.
Of course. Yeah. The interesting
question is if you have a bunch of
separate skills in your brain and they
can be inflow or in frustration or bored
at the same time, then what is the
overall feeling you get out of it?
And I think good way to think about it
is to think of flow as positive. I gave
this two plus signs. Frustration is more
negative than flow is positive though.
So I gave it three negative signs. So if
one part of your brain is in flow and
one is frustrated, then the frustration
will be the overpowering feeling.
Frustration beats out fun. And then
boredom is only slightly negative. So if
you are having fun, if you're in flow
state and another part of your brain at
the same time is bored, then the fun
part will prevail. So you can kind of
think of this as negative, this is
positive. And if you want, you can think
of boredom as kind of neutral. But if
everything is bored, then you're going
to be bored. So now, if this is our
current brain stage, then we could
assign numbers to it like so. The bored
skills give couple of minus points. Fun
gives us quite a bunch of plus points,
and the frustrated skill gives a lot of
minus points. So overall, this would
probably not feel very fun. We would end
up somewhere in the negatives there. So
why is frustration more frustrating than
boredom? Like why is frustration
perceived as worse than boredom? I think
that frustration is just more the more
of a panic state essentially. Boredom at
the very least it's a relaxed state and
frustration is kind of a panic state. So
if you have to choose between the two, I
think you'd rather be uh bored than
frustrated. Right now the interesting
question, how do you get someone into
flow? The problem you have if you want
to get someone into flow is that you do
not know how skilled they are. Do you do
not know if they have this level of
skill or this level of skill or this or
this? You have literally no freaking
idea where they are on the skill
spectrum. And now the problem gets even
worse because there are multiple people
probably that you have to deal with.
whether you're making games or whether
you're an educator, you're dealing with
multiple people and every single one of
them has probably a different skill
level and you don't really know where
any of them are on the skill spectrum.
And to make matters even worse, there's
not just one skill. There are multiple
skills that your game or that are
relevant for your education or or
whatever. There are multiple skills you
have to worry about. There are multiple
people you have to worry about. It gets
very very complex, very hard to get all
of them into flow. So here you can see
if we choose a fixed challenge um I kind
of drew a faint line here like everybody
gets the same challenge but everybody
has a different outcome depending on
their skill. So if this girl here is
like not very skilled then she'll end up
frustrated but these two nerds here
they'll end up bored even though it's
the exact same challenge for everyone.
You can see that right the challenge is
the same for everyone just the skill for
everyone is different and they will
impact how they perceive it. And the
same is true for all of the other
skills. And this one might be fun. This
one might be frustrating. And this goes
on and on and on cuz there are more
people you have to worry about and there
are more skills you have to worry about.
And if we zoom out even further, then we
get something like this. So we have
people on one axis and skills on the
other axis. And then we can color in the
squares based on whether that skill is
inflow, bored, or frustrated. So for a
game that would maybe look something
like this. I'm not entirely sure what to
call this. Maybe a flowgram or a
fungram.
I don't know. But I feel it's a useful
framework to think about your games. I
think normally games would look
something like this if you do it well. I
think you would want to go target only a
few skills, but target those well cuz
there are too many skills. You cannot
get every single skill into flow state.
I would say it makes sense to pick a
couple of skills. Try to get those into
flow state for as many people as
possible. Intentionally leave a lot of
the skills unchallenged or neutral
because it's better for them to be in
bored state than to be in frustrated
state. We intentionally don't introduce
so much challenge as to make relatively
sure that they're not going to end up
frustrated. Does that make sense? I hope
it does. And then for example, if you do
a play test and you notice something
like this, one of the skills that you
were hoping would be fun, everybody
finds frustrating, then you know you're
doing something wrong and that the
difficulty is probably too high. And
even worse, if you were not even
targeting the skill and everybody still
finds it frustrating, then you know that
something's really, really wrong. So
this is my advice. Only target a select
set of skills, but do those well.
Intentionally keep other skills
unchallenged. If you can't do them well,
boring is better than frustrating. And
then which skills you target, I think
depends mostly on genre. The genre
basically communicates to the player
which skills they're going to need to
play your game. Now, to the main
question, how do you make a skill fun
for people with varying skill? Cuz um
that's still a problem we haven't really
solved yet, right? If you target a
specific skill, how do you make it fun
for people despite all of their
different skill levels? And I think you
have four methods for this. One is to
let people choose their own difficulty.
So this will especially be pick your own
pace is like super powerful. So not even
picking your difficulty but just picking
your own speed. This is something we
desperately need in education. And this
is also super useful in video games. For
example, turnbased games are like that
by design. You can take as much time as
you want to finish your turn or to
complete your turn. So turn turn-based
games are great for this. A lot of other
games do this as well. You can you
choose the pace that you go through the
world. This is really fantastic for um
letting players adjust their difficulty
basically, but you can also let players
pick their own path and like have
different parts of the world that have
different difficulties. You have can
have difficulty settings. So very
directly letting players pick their own
difficulty or you can have optional
challenges or collectibles that are
spread around in the world and in order
to collect them you have to increase the
challenge or you have to do something
that's more difficult than normal. All
of those are good options but they're on
their own they're not enough. You also
need to choose the correct difficulty
for people for players for your
students. You need to serve it on a
silver platter to them. They're not
always going to pick the correct
difficulty for them. you need to help
them with that. So, there are some
players or some students that are smart
enough to follow the fun themselves, but
some of them need to be tricked into
having fun. So, you need to dangle some
other rewards in front of their face
like they're like, "Look, you can get
some rewards or recognition or social
status or whatever." And then with that,
you trick them into having fun. For
example, in Mega Bonk, in order to
unlock the cursed tome, you need to beat
the stage boss in under 5 minutes. This
is dangling a reward in front of your
face. It's like here here's the reward.
And then in order to get the reward, you
need to do something that's fun. So this
is uh tricking you into having fun. This
is the way to do it. But more
specifically, how can you choose the
correct difficulty for people? Um first
of all, you need to have a smooth
difficulty curve. This is the base, the
main thing you need to get right. So the
challenge needs to slowly increase over
time. And usually people just rush
through the game until they meet the
point that's has the correct difficulty
for them. And hopefully from that point
on your game has the correct difficulty
curve for players to stay in the flow
channel. And there are always kind of
two different types of difficulty.
There's the difficulty of learning
something entirely new. It's like the
blue tan curve here. And there's the
skill of mastery. Mastering what you
already know. That's kind of the orange
curve here. So you have the mastery
challenge and the novelty challenge. And
a lot of games work like this where they
have a lot of the novelty challenge
frontloaded. So you have to learn a lot
of the new stuff at the very beginning
and then you have to learn to master it
afterwards. For example, chess. First
you have to learn the rules of chess and
then you still have decades of mastery
in front of you. There's one other model
that video games like to use, which is
like this saw shape um architecture
where they basically split the learning
into multiple chunks. You don't learn
all of the mechanics of the game in the
beginning, but you learn the mechanics
like one after another throughout the
game. And in case you want to do that,
what you do is you use a saw shape for
the mastery difficulty curve. So the
mastery difficulty should go up slowly
over time, but every time you introduce
something new, you intentionally drop
the mastery difficulty back down so that
there's um enough capacity to do
efficient learning for the new stuff.
It's all about efficient learning. You
just want to just want to create a good
learning environment and this makes for
the best learning environment. This is
why this difficulty curve looks the way
it looks. So one is the front-loaded
discovery approach and one is the spread
out discovery. There was the difficulty
curve. Matchmaking fills a similar role.
You pick the correct opponents for
players. Automatic difficulty
adjustment. So instead of the players
picking the difficulty, you pick the
difficulty for the players. Either uh
telling them or not telling them. This
exists in very different variations. And
also intentional skill gates. So that
means basically locking parts of your
world off until players have the correct
skill to have fun in those areas. If you
think somebody doesn't have fun in a
certain or can't have fun in a certain
area of a game yet because they're not
skilled enough, then what you can do is
you can make the entrance to that area a
little more challenging than it's
supposed to be. And that will just stop
players from going in there if they're
not skilled enough. It's a little bit
risky because they might not know that
there are other paths and then get stuck
and frustrated. But in a lot of games,
this is still a very effective method.
Thirdly, you can expand the flow channel
or suck people into the flow channel
with soft success and failure states.
So, if you're thinking about the
feedback you're receiving from the
world, it doesn't necessarily just have
to be well well well poor poor poor poor
or well well poor well poor whatever. It
can be more nuance. It can be there can
be more soft interpolated
victory and failure states. So for
example, if you think about a high
score, a high score game gives more
nuanced feedback because it tells you a
score instead of just win or lose,
right? So that is already more nuanced.
And there are a lot of ways to do this
like soft win and fail states that give
you more nuanced feedback about what
went well and what went wrong. The more
feedback and the more nuance the
feedback you're providing, the better.
Rubber banding is interesting and also
catch-up mechanics. So both of those,
the point is basically to help you out
if you're behind and to maybe slow you
down if you're ahead. So rubber bending
is the wording I would use for single
player games and catch-up mechanics is
the term I would use for multiplayer
games, but they're still essentially the
same thing. Artificial support if you're
behind and artificial hindrance if
you're ahead. And what it does is it
makes it actually improves the signal to
noise ratio. Cuz if you're very far
behind, then you're in a situation where
everything you do doesn't work anymore.
And if you're very far ahead, then
everything you do works no matter what.
And as we've already discussed, that
leads to poor signal to noise ratio. So,
rubber bending and catch-up mechanics,
they get you back into a spot where if
you're behind, you can get positive
feedback from positive actions, and if
you're ahead, you can get negative
feedback from negative actions. And if
you're too far ahead or too far behind,
that's actually not the case. So, rubber
bending and catch-up mechanics fix that.
And then you can also have other means
of frustration avoidance like hints,
skips, etc. So, anything that helps
avoid frustration is usually a good
thing. Last but not least, have natural
layers of difficulty. And this is
actually more about what you learn than
about how you learn because this is
about the content of what you learn
itself and the difficulty that provides.
So if there are layers of meaning in
your story and that would be one example
right there there are a lot of stories
that can be enjoyed by children but can
also be enjoyed by adults and that is
because there are layers of meaning. So,
the story then has the correct
difficulty for the kids, but it also has
the correct difficulties for the
grown-ups because there are layers of
meaning that the younger people might
not notice or take note of. But if
you're old enough and if you can see
that the challenge is there, then the
challenge is there for you. You're
basically digging deeper into those
layers. And emergent complexity is very
good and good with this. So if you have
simple rules that make for complex
systems like the game of Go, Go has
extremely simple rules, but it has very
a lot of layers of difficulty that you
can dig through after you've learned the
rules. And that is not about how you
learn it. That is just about the rules
itself. There is a lot of emergent
complexity and that is why there are so
many layers for you to dig through. And
the same similar to emergent complexity
is combinatorial complexity. or if you
have a lot of different objects in your
game that can combine with each other in
interesting and unique ways, that is a
very similar effect to to this one.
Hidden challenge is exactly this
phenomenon of you only notice that there
is a challenge once you're good enough
to see the challenge. Like to give a
little bit of an example, for example,
when you play start playing our game
Islanders, Islanders is a city builder
where you just place buildings and then
you get points depending on which
buildings are around the building. When
you start playing the game, you're
basically just dragging the buildings
from your inventory to the map. You get
points and you're just dragging them
around to see where you get the most
points. And you don't even really see
that there's a deeper planning
challenge. But then as you keep playing
and as you internalize the system, this
hidden challenge, these this layer of of
depth basically reveals itself to you.
And it's like, okay, if I want to
maximize my points, then I actually need
to plan my city ahead of time. need to
plan where I want to do place my city
centers, where I want to place my towers
and my farms and so on. And that type of
challenge is not apparent when you start
playing, but the longer you play, the
more apparent it becomes. That would be
an example for layers of difficulty or
difficulty hidden challenge that reveals
itself over time basically. So this is
how you get people into flow state even
if they have different skill levels. And
this is the answer to the question that
we asked. How do you make a skill fun
for people with varying skills? This is
the most important question to wonder
about. And of course, the biggest answer
is always just make it a good learning
environment. Everything we just talked
about is making a making it a good
learning environment. Just different
tips and tricks to achieve that. And all
of that you should only do for a couple
of select skills cuz you cannot possibly
do this for every single skill that
exists. You choose a couple of skills
and you give them this treatment.
And that's the best you can do. Games
are full of decisions, like choosing
upgrades, choosing different upgrades,
choosing which perks you want to start
into a level with, choosing your weapon,
choosing where to send your units,
choosing where you go yourself, which
buildings to place in which order, where
to place them, which upgrades to choose.
And even like platformer games, when to
jump, that is basically a decision. But
also which route through the level you
want to take, that is a decision. In
puzzle games, which solution you want to
try next, which solution approach you
want to try next, all of those are
decisions. How to build your factory,
how to lay it out, how to optimize it,
like programming games, which solution
you want to take to a problem, which
direction to explore, if you want to
explore down or if you want to go back
up, which weapon to choose for. an
encounter. A lot of the skills you have
in a game are decision-m skills. A very
very big portion of skills are
decision-m skills. Different kinds of
decision-m skills, tactical decision-m,
fast decision-m, slow decision- making,
all kinds of decision-m. And that leads
to a very interesting question and that
is what makes a decision fun. How do you
create decisions for others that are
perceived as fun? Oh, the the same
answer is always you want them to be a
good learning environment. And what you
need for that is a balance. Well, let's
have a look at a quick example. Let's
say you have to choose between the sword
of powerness which deals 50 damage and
the stick which deals one damage. Then
this is a boring decision because it's
very obvious what you should pick.
Right? If there at least if this
information is complete and there are no
secrets hidden within then this is a
very very boring decision to take. Why?
Because it's too easy. It's boring
boring decision. like we have capacity
to take more difficult decisions than
that. Now, if you have to choose between
the twisted gnome core and the quantum
spook module with like really
complicated effects, then you're
probably going to be frustrated or
overwhelmed. Or even worse, you're going
to find it boring because it's so
complicated that you're not even sure
what the point of this decision is at
all. But hey, maybe you play the game
for a little more and then later on you
find out that the quantum spook module
is actually the sword of powerness in
disguise. It's just completely
overpowered. It's completely broken. And
so now the decision becomes boring
again, right? Cuz now it's obvious what
you should pick. You should always pick
this one. It's overpowered. You should
always pick it when you see it boring.
So now it's boring again. The tricky
thing is to find a decision that's going
to stay interesting for long. like
between the poison boomerang and the
lightning spear, something like that
with like fair effects that are easy to
understand and to reason about, but
still complicated enough that they're
not going to get boring. That is tricky
though. But that is what balance is
indeed for. So the point of balancing is
to make your decisions non-trivial, not
boring, predictable, not frustrating,
and challenging even after repetition.
And this is in particularly difficult,
the third one here. Yeah, that that is
why balancing is difficult. And I think
the key is that if you want your
decisions to be replayable, then they
kind of must be different each time. I
think this is also why the the cards
that you have to choose from started
becoming so popular because they kind of
mix things up. They randomize your
decisions more, which makes for
interesting decisions more often. But
decisions at the same time still have to
be non-trivial and predictable. This is
hard. I think one good way to think
about this is to think of it like a
toolbox. You're providing the player
with a bunch of different tools. Those
tools could, for example, be abilities
or or just things you can do, units you
can build, buildings you can build,
weapons you can use, just different
tools you give to the player. Depending
on your game, those will mean different
things. And I think the problem is that
a lot of people think about balancing in
like this comparing power levels kind of
way. It's like the drill has 80 power,
the screwdriver has 60 power, and if
everything just has a certain skill or a
power level, that's boring. It's super
boring. Maybe you've seen this meme. It
goes in the square hole. That's right.
It goes in the square hole. Just like a
dude putting all of the shapes into the
same hole because everything fits into
the square hole. Classic meme. And the
problem is that no matter how well you
balance your game, even if you get
everything to the same power level,
one's always going to be slightly better
than the others, and now you have
unfortunately created a square hole. And
this can now solve every situation you
have in the game. And people will be
like, "That's right. It goes in the
square hole." Actually, I think square
hole is definitely a term we should
adapt for balancing in video games. I I
definitely like that. Oh, I think your
balancing has a square hole. The
solution for that is to make all of your
tools multi-dimensional.
So, a tool should never just be have
like a straight up power level. It
should have should be differently good
at different things. It should solve
different problems. Duh. And what this
allows you to do is it allows you to
pres present the player with different
problems that will then require
different solutions. And the more varied
the problems, the more replayable it's
probably going to be in the long run
because that means the decision of which
tool to use is going to stay interesting
for longer. But in order for even for
you to be even able to create those
situations, you need this kind of
balancing approach where all of the
tools you give to the player have
different advantages and disadvantages.
And now you still need to be careful
that you don't end up in a with a
situation where it's like very obvious
always which tool to use. It's like,
yeah, if there's a screw, you need the
screwdriver. If there's a nail, you need
the hammer. That That's also boring.
What you want is you actually want to
create a bunch of interesting edge cases
so that the player needs to make an
interesting and nuanced decision about
which tool to choose. That that would be
the best case scenario. And the more of
these interesting edge cases you can
create, the better. What makes a
decision fun? Balance.
Balance. That's why people complain
about balance so much. It's because if
the balance is off, it's not a good
learning environment and it makes the
game boring or frustrating. Remember,
decisions need to be non-trivial, not
boring, predictable, not frustrating,
and challenging even after repetition.
Everybody said, "My game is fun. Why is
it not successful?" This is just a quick
disclaimer that I need to give here is
success of your game is also a lot about
marketability of your game and stuff
like that. Your game should be fun, but
it's not the only thing that your game
needs to be. It It needed to be said. It
needed to be said. All right, that's all
I had for games. I would now like to
move on to the next point, education.
What's very interesting is that we're um
slowly increasing our difficulty as we
move along here. Games are sort of the
most easy environment, the easiest
environment to create fun in. Education
is more difficult because what we're
working with has more limitations and is
more difficult. And then doing the same
for life is basically the most
difficult. For example, games are
tailored to taste whereas life is kind
of random. Games have clear goals.
Education is kind of more vague goals.
Life has no explicit goals at all.
Everything gets more difficult in this
direction. We're now moving on to
education. Let's have a look. Frequent
and fast feedback. I I think we already
have a problem here. As far as I
remember when I was in school, it was
neither fast. oftentimes when you wrote
a test or something you were waiting for
it for weeks nor was it frequent because
there are a lot of other students and
you know teachers have limited amount of
time it wasn't fast nor frequent it was
neither fast nor frequent problem number
one deep focus I don't think school is a
particularly great place to focus it's
usually noisy lots of distractions and a
challenge matching your skill it's very
difficult for one teacher for one
educator to present a challenge that
matches the skill of every student at
all times so that leads to you being
either bored or overwhelmed like 80 to
90% of the time. So first of all, what
can what can educators do? I think the
first thing to look at is what we had a
talk about earlier, right? Getting the
difficulty right. Let students choose
their own difficulty. Help them choose
the correct difficulty for them. expand
the flow channel by um with catch-up
mechanics, rubber banding, antif
frustration and having natural layers of
difficulty. Here we have a little bit of
good news because most of the things
education tries to teach us already has
lots of that. For for example, math is a
great example for that. Math already has
tons and tons of layers of natural
difficulty and most actually most
subjects do biology, chemistry. It goes
deep. It goes deep. Now, the main
limitation of why most of these things
aren't possible is because we don't have
enough of these alo called educators.
They I'm know they're trying very hard.
They're doing usually doing as best as
they can. If you have to deal with so
many students at once, it's not going to
be easy. So, one thing I'm always
wondering about is in the age of
technology, why do all of these students
need to listen to live performances
of a teacher explaining something?
Wouldn't be much more efficient to
basically have one godlike educator like
the best educator in the world is like
completely on fire and completely
superhuman explanation skills. Have them
record a video and then just play that
to the students cuz I think that's
already what's what you see a lot
nowadays, right? You completely don't
get it at school and then you watch a 5
minute YouTube video about it and it
immediately clicks. Why is it that not
everybody can just benefit from the best
educators in the world and just learn
more efficiently that way? Are attention
spans getting shorter? Like if I make a
suggestion like that? A lot of people
will be like, "Oh no, should education
just be 5 minute videos? Oh, that's so
sad. Attention spans are getting short.
Oh man, we're all screwed." Or is it is
it something else? Is it that patience
for inefficient learning is getting
lower? Because from the perspective of
the student, if you have to listen to a
2hour explanation of something that
could be explained in 5 minutes, I think
um you'd be right to be impatient about
that. I think the truth is somewhere in
between. I think attention spans are
probably getting shorter. Let's not
let's let's not ignore that. But I also
think this is also true. patience for
inefficient learning is getting lower.
If you have to sit there for hours and
you know there are some more efficient
way to learn the same thing, you're
going to be pissed, rightfully so.
Another thing that I want to point out
is um that video games are just more
multi-ensory, multi-dimensional, if you
will. Whereas, for example, learning
vocabulary from a vocabulary book only
challenges one skill, which is like your
language skills. A video game challenges
a lot of your skills or at least many
many more of your skills. As we've
talked about earlier, no video game will
challenge or should aim to challenge all
of your skills. But at the very least,
it's going to cover more senses and more
skills than the vocabulary book, right?
You're going to have something to look
at. You're going to have a word to
understand. Going to have to use your
hands, your ears, your coordination,
like your navigation skills. So from the
perspective of the brain, I think what's
happening here is just this is perceived
as inefficient and this is perceived as
efficient cuz the brain doesn't care
about what it's learning. It's just just
cares about learning. And here here it's
just learning more to be honest, just
learning more at once. If the only thing
you care about is learning vocabulary
efficiently, maybe this is better. But
if you care about learning independently
of what exactly you're learning, then
obviously this is better. And I think
this is something that we could perhaps
try to acknowledge in education a bit
more is maybe not overly focus on just
the one thing that we want to get into
people's brains but also let some
adjacent skills in there for the sake of
making it more fun and more enjoyable
for the students. I I personally think
the brain is sport training only one
skill at a time and I think the brain is
like I can do better than that. So the
main limitation of only having one
educator is something that I think we
can overcome also with other technology
like for example I personally find that
AI is honestly really great teacher if
you ask the correct questions and I
think this is going to improve in the
future. So while I still want humans to
be involved in the loop while I want
students to talk with each other and
socialize and so on I think I I like
learning much better now than I used to
before AI. So the interesting divide
that you can sort of look at here is
that games are learning useless
information efficiently and education is
about learning useful information
efficiently. Both of those in quotation
marks because not everything you learn
in games is useless and not everything
you learn in education is useful. Like
already that distinction is not as
strong as some people think it is. But
at the very least this is sort of what
we're aiming at, right? Education is
specifically aiming to teach useful
information and games is specifically
aiming to just teach some information
for for the sake of fun. Now the
interesting thing here is that this is a
thought experiment. If the robots if AI
takes all of our jobs then what does
useful information or what does useful
skills even mean? Doesn't it all become
useless? Then does the border between
games and education disappear at that
point? As mentioned, a bit hypothetical
thought experiment. But if we end up in
a future where AI ends up doing pretty
much everything better than humans can,
then I think this is exactly where we're
going to end up. There's not really
going to be a difference between games
and education anymore because they're
both they're both teaching useless
information. there there's not going to
be anything that you have to learn in
that future. Uh some things maybe right
social skills so on but you you know
what I mean. So at that point maybe the
two will merge into one and the divide
will disappear completely. It it'll all
be the same no matter what no matter
that's going to happen or not. I think
seeing learning as something fun is
something I I want back. I want teachers
to understand that learning is supposed
to be fun because a lot of teachers
don't seem to understand that and I also
want students to understand that
learning is in fact supposed to be fun
and also a lot of students don't seem to
understand that and I just hope we get
this understanding back. This is the
main this is my main point. This is the
main thing honestly that bothers me when
I look at the whole thing is that we
lost this understanding for that
learning is actually supposed to be fun.
The teachers are like oh my god how do
we make education more like games? like
look at those children. They're playing
games so much. Why can't why can't they
invest as much energy into education?
And the reason for that is actually just
that you that we need to do a better job
at creating good learning environments
and not that we need to gamify with
strange rewards or whatever. It's like
just just make it good. Just make it a
good learning environment. That's all
you need need to do. And then for the
student side of things, don't let school
discourage you. learn on your own terms
things that you're interested in. And
that way hopefully you will realize that
learning is indeed fun when you do it
efficiently. And the reason school
doesn't feel fun is not because learning
isn't fun because um inefficient
learning isn't fun. Also, I don't want
to crap on educators too much. You're
you're doing a great job given the
environment you have. Like as game
developers, it's easy to ramble about
cuz we have have a much easier time than
you have. Let's just try to get this
understanding back. That would be really
nice. Learning is fun. Especially if my
thought experiment turns out to be true
and AI does end up taking all of the
jobs, then this is even more true. Last
but not least, I have a couple of
thoughts about how to apply all of this
to your personal life as well. I think
the main challenge like the lifedefining
challenge I would almost say for anyone
is taking responsibilities.
Taking responsibilities that is the
challenge that once you start your life
you you don't have the ability to take
any responsibility but as you get older
you get the ability to take on more and
more responsibility. and the ability to
take on responsibility that's that's a
skill of course that in increases or
improves as you get older. What is a
responsibility? In short, a
responsibility means expectations. A
responsibility means someone could be
someone else could also be yourself
expects something from you. If nobody
expects anything from you, life feels
very pointless and boring. Um it feels
like there's no meaning. You you there's
nothing. You're not needed essentially,
right? And if you have too many
responsibilities, more responsibilities
than you can handle, then it feels very
frustrating and your life also doesn't
feel great. So I think this is the main
thing and the first thing that I would
try to balance out very carefully. If
we're talking about making your life
more fun is responsibilities. Take take
on the correct amount of
responsibilities. If you feel like
you're here, take on more
responsibilities. If you feel like
you're here, take on less
responsibilities. Try to stay in this
flow channel. And with responsibilities
in particular, remember that it doesn't
have to be comfortable, right? Taking on
even taking on the correct amount of
responsibilities, it's going to feel a
little bit uncomfortable. It's not going
to be as comfortable as taking on no
responsibilities. But eventually, if you
take on no responsibilities, your
self-worth is going to go down and it is
going to bore you in a way that's
difficult to describe. Everybody knows
if you take on too many
responsibilities, it very much feels
like drowning. It's also not very good.
It's okay to be a little uncomfortable
with your responsibilities. That's
actually great. Try to be there. Some
very funny misunderstandings with this
can happen in real life when somebody's
talking about how they're uncomfortable
with their life situation and then the
other person misinterprets it as them
complaining about their discomfort and
they're like, "What the hell? Why are
you not just chilling on the surface?
Why are you trying to hold your breath
under water? What What's wrong with you?
Why are you doing that? And then the
other person gets mad like, "Aren't you
listening? I'm describing what I'm
doing." And uh I want some recognition
for my skill to hold my breath. What?
Why are you telling me not to do this?
And then they're like, "They must be
crazy. They're intentionally making
themselves uncomfortable. Why the hell
are they doing that?" Pay attention to
this in your own life. very interesting
misunderstandings with that. Remember
this explore versus exploit dilemma?
I've noticed that I'm going to
intentionally do something useless every
now and then because this will allow me
to do useful things later on if I'm
lucky. But this this itself does not
have to be useful. This only needs a
very very small chance to be useful
later in order to already be useful.
Right? This is learning something new,
trying out a new tool, doing something
you've never done before, cooking
something new, just trying out new
things in life. That's exploration.
And then exploit exploitation means
taking advantage of all of the things
you've learned already. Or it might even
mean chilling on the surface for a bit,
taking a bit of a break, right? And you
need the correct mixture of both of
these. One interesting thing I've heard
a while ago is that in relationships
there's usually one explorer and one
exploiter and then together as a couple
you end up doing the correct mix of
both. Interesting. Interesting. No
matter what find the correct mix between
the two. Follow the fun. I think this is
more powerful than it sounds. If
something is fun, that means your brain
is probably fully engaged in multiple
brain regions. If something's very fun,
that means you're learning a lot of
things at once. So, if something's fun,
that probably means it's worth your
time. Actually, fun means you're
learning. Doesn't mean you're learning
something useful. It just means you're
learning. So, there's a small caveat,
but in general, good rule of thumb. So,
how do you deal with boredom in life? If
something's boring, kind of feel
underwhelmed in every single way, what
what do you do about it? One option is
to increase the challenge or to add more
stimulation. So this could be internally
or externally. This could be singing
under the shower. This could be um
turning on a YouTube video, turning on a
podcast or internal could be thinking
about something else, right? You can
also create challenge by thinking about
stuff. You can think about problems even
if you're currently doing something very
boring. And then the other way to solve
the problem is actually exactly the
opposite which is mindfulness. And that
means pay closer attention to what's
already there. These are very opposite
solutions to the same problem. So for
example, when doing the dishes, one
thing you can do is you can turn on a
YouTube video, you can turn on a
podcast, you can listen to something
while doing the dishes. There would be
more stimulation.
And the other option would be the
opposite would be just paying closer
attention. Just paying attention to your
breathing, to how the water feels on
your hands, trying to do every movement
like very intelligently. appreciating
the challenge of what's already in front
of you basically. So there would be
appreciating the natural layers of
difficulty because almost everything in
life already has those layers and the
way I interpreted mindfulness is
basically a way to dig into those layers
and find fun that way. Like when I first
heard like the terms mindfulness and so
on, I my immediate reaction was like
boring. But I think I didn't really
understand that it's actually not
supposed to be boring. It's actually
supposed to be fun. How do you deal with
overwhelm? Uh, this is more tricky and
it's also bigger problem because if
you're overwhelmed in any area, then
you're definitely going to feel it. So,
the best thing you can do is to stop to
do something else, practice in an easier
environment, decelerate, simplify, or
reframe the challenge. So, all of those
are all only sometimes possible, right?
Life life is messy. You're not always in
full control. But one thing you can
always try to do is you can always try
to reframe the challenge into something
that feels more manageable. Kind of like
Dark Souls or Getting Over It if you
think about them as challenges about
mechanical skill aren't so fun, but if
you think about them as challenges of
perseverance, they actually are a lot
more fun. I think you can do the same um
in real life. For example, I really hate
filling out cryptic forms. Uh, in
Germany we have like a lot of
bureaucracy and I find it very
frustrating to deal with sometimes or
when I have to deal with it. But I can
um somehow soften the blow by reframing
the challenge from filling out cryptic
forms to um not letting minor annoyances
get to me. And all of a sudden if I
reframe it like that then it's not that
big of a problem. I'll just fill it out
in a couple of minutes and be done with
it. It's okay. that some people only
seem to have fun when they're winning.
It's like a very strange phenomenon to
me. Like families play a board game and
only after only the winner is happy,
everybody else is like, "No,
my day is ruined." And I think that is
because losing is also a skill. One
thing I definitely wish for is for
people to become better at losing so
that you can play board games together
without throwing a tantrum. Yeah,
there's just there's just a little side
note that maybe you need to reframe this
challenge um of it's actually not about
winning the game. Maybe it's better
about getting about getting better at
losing. H how about that? And definitely
what I want to see in general is that we
stop looking at fun as something
disgusting cuz deep down this is the
feeling I get every now and then. This
is obviously exaggerated but it's like
ew fun. Ah, we don't have time for that.
It's like um why why are we looking at
fun like that? I don't like it. Like
Timmy is playing with his bricks here
and mom's screaming, "Can't you do
something useful?" Like once again, this
is obviously highly exaggerated. Nobody
would do that with a kid. But this is
still as a grown-up, this is kind of how
you feel like you're just playing with
your toys and somebody's screaming at
you uh why you can't do something
useful. But you are you are exploring.
They want you to exploit because they
don't understand the value of exploring.
I just want to bring this back into our
common understanding of how the world
works. That would be fantastic. So,
little Timmy is here playing. I don't
want him to be disturbed. Um, I want us
all to collectively build a protective
bubble around it and to appreciate the
flow state, to appreciate the fun he's
having and be like, let's not disturb
Timmy unless it's absolutely necessary,
unless there's like an emergency fire
alarm or something like that. And he's a
metaphor for also grown-ups, of course.
Look at flow, state, and fun as
something precious, valuable, and as
something that's worth preserving and
creating more of. Follow the fun,
everybody. I hope you enjoyed my
insides.
