For the last ten years, Game Maker's Toolkit
has operated on a pretty simple principle:
that one of the best ways to learn about game
design is to just play a bunch of video games.
Games can introduce us to
new mechanics and systems.
They can teach us about fundamental game design
concepts like feedback loops
and input and output randomness.
And games can act as a handy reference point when
discussing game ideas with other game designers.
But there are a lot of video games out there.
Across more than fifty years of video
game history, there have been hundreds
of thousands of video games across different
genres and eras and platforms and styles.
And so if you were going to play some
games to learn about game design,
it can be tricky to know where to start.
And so that's what this video is all about.
I've picked the 100 games that most helped
me on my journey to understand game design.
These are the games that levelled up my game
design literacy, and opened my
eyes to what this medium can do.
And so this is not a list of the 100
greatest games ever made - though
I would recommend pretty much
all of the games on this list.
And it's not a list of the 100
most important or influential
games ever made - though you will pick
up some history lessons along the way.
Instead, it's a list of the 100 games that
most helped me to learn about game design.
Which is to say, this is unapologetically my list.
While I got some outside help
to narrow down the candidates,
the final list of games is all me - to reflect
the games that most helped me on my journey.
So this list is missing entire
genres and massive franchises.
And there are two Zelda games on this
list, and that was me showing restraint.
For each game, I'll try to focus on just one
aspect that I think makes it worth playing,
but you'll need to play the game
for yourself to get the full effect.
To that point, I've noted where
the game is available to buy digitally
on PC, Xbox, PlayStation, or Switch.
But sadly, due to the sorry
state of video game preservation,
some older titles are just
impossible to get digitally.
So in those instances, you'll either have to do
the legwork to seek out a physical copy
of the game and maybe an old console,
or use the alternatives I suggest
to play something somewhat similar.
With all that being said, let's jump in.
I'm Mark Brown, and this is the 100
games that taught me about game design.
Space Invaders was arguably the first game with
the sort of difficulty curve
that we'd recognise today.
It was partly a quirk of engineering.
As you shoot aliens and remove them from
the battlefield, the machine’s primitive
processor had one fewer sprite to draw and
so the whole game runs a little quicker.
Every invader you swat, the faster
- and harder - the game becomes.
But also, each level was intentionally
designed to be a little more difficult
than the one before, as enemies start
closer to the bottom of the screen.
Together, these create that wonderful spiky
difficulty curve where the game is gradually
getting harder and harder, but things
do ease off when you start a new level.
This undulating staircase provides rising tension…
but also moments of relief in
which to catch your breath.
It’s essentially the exact same
difficulty curve that’s used in
games today - making it an effective
way to start learning about the topic.
You can play Space Invaders in your browser
through the link in the description.
Also check out Space Invaders Extreme on Steam,
which reimagines the game as a neon-dipped
score-chaser with a thumping techno soundtrack.
One of my favourite things about Pac-Man is the
way the game swings between
two very different states.
By default, the game is about fear.
As you try to clear all the pellets in the maze,
you are chased around by four meddlesome ghosts
who follow your every move, and seem to be able to
work together to pin you down and catch you out.
But then you grab the power pellet.
And for a brief moment, the
tables are drastically turned.
Now you are the predator,
and the ghosts are the prey.
They run away from Pac-Man, and if
you touch a ghost you’ll earn points,
and temporarily remove it from play.
It is a satisfying reversal of roles that
feels wonderful every time you pull it off.
And it also keeps the game varied and engaging
- Pac-Man is not a one-note game about a single
emotion, but a dramatic back-and-forth
tussle between power and powerlessness.
Pac-Man can be played in your browser, and there
are ports on Steam and other major platforms.
You might also want to check
out the semi-official sequel Ms.
Pac-Man, and the addictive, modern
reimagining Pac-Man: Championship Edition.
With there being only a few years between the
launch of Dungeons & Dragons and home computers,
it’s not surprising that a lot of early
PC games were basically computerised D&D,
with the machine taking on the
role of a digital dungeon master.
But one game stood out more than the rest: Rogue.
Designers Michael Toy and Glenn Wichman
wanted to make an RPG that would feel
completely different each time you play, so hit
upon the idea of using procedural generation.
Now the dungeon layouts are randomly
cobbled together by a computer,
which is following certain rules for how to
place down rooms, corridors, loot, and enemies.
They also didn’t want a way for players to
simply learn the dungeon through rote repetition,
and so hit upon another idea that would come
to define a genre: when you die, you die.
No check points, save states, or respawns.
It’s back to the very beginning
and on to an entirely new dungeon.
Now I'll admit - I didn't play Rogue as a kid.
But it's been so influential on the games
I play today that I just had to include it.
We'll have to wait until much later in the list
to see these ideas truly come into their own.
You can play Rogue in your browser, or on Steam.
It took a surprisingly long time for game
developers to think of letting a character jump.
It took even longer to make that jump feel fun.
Consider Mario’s first game: Donkey
Kong, in which Mario has three,
predictably preprogrammed
jumps - up, left, and right.
But by Super Mario Bros., Mario has, well,
essentially an infinite number of jumps.
That’s because the height is determined
by how long you hold the button.
Because the distance is driven by how fast
Mario is running before you leave the ground.
And because you can even influence
the plumber’s mid-air movement.
By having a jump that is driven
by the push-and-pull of physics,
gravity, and player input, the simple act
of leaping around is made incredibly fun,
expressive, and challenging - a mechanic
that could sustain an entire game.
Or indeed, an entire genre of games.
Mario’s platforming has certainly
improved in later games.
The physics were tweaked and
perfected in Super Mario Bros. 3.
They were perfectly reimagined
in 3D in Super Mario 64.
And new moves like the spin, ground pound,
wall jump, long jump, and hat throw
add even more expressive action.
But Super Mario Bros. is still worthy of study
for its ambitious first stab
at a proper video game jump.
Super Mario Bros. is available as part of
the NES library on the Switch Online service.
While Shigeru Miyamoto and co. were
finishing up Super Mario Bros.,
they were simultaneously working on
another game that would, you know,
kick off a 40 year franchise and change
the course of video game history.
What’s your side hustle, huh?
That game was, of course, The Legend of Zelda.
An adventurous fantasy epic, designed to emulate
Miyamoto’s childhood memories of
exploring the Japanese countryside.
And it did this by giving the
player a huge amount of freedom.
You’re dropped into a forest clearing
and told to, essentially get on with it.
Your goal is to find eight pieces of a giant
golden triangle but how you
do this is largely up to you.
You can now go in any direction,
explore where you like, and take on
challenges in any order you see fit.
Sure, there are some obstacles that can’t be
overcome until you find certain power-ups.
Many areas are filled with tough baddies who
will flatten an inexperienced adventurer.
And the eight underground
dungeons are technically numbered.
But still: Zelda 1 gives a remarkable
amount of freedom to players.
And this makes your journey through
the game feel personal and special.
It’s driven by curiosity, rather
than a designer’s leading hand.
You can get it on the Switch Online service.
After the success of Super Mario Bros.,
platformers fell into a predictable formula:
a series of levels, split into a series of worlds,
played in whatever order the designer intended.
But Capcom shook that idea up with Mega Man.
This game begins on a stage select screen,
with six buttons that take you to the
lairs of six different robot masters.
And you can take these dudes
on in any order you like.
This gives the player a greater sense of freedom,
and encourages replay-ability as the game
will feel subtly different each time you play.
But it’s more than just picking the order.
Every time you defeat a robot master
you’ll take on one of their powers.
And those powers will prove helpful in
other levels and against other bosses.
For instance, you can defeat Guts
Man to unlock a rock-chucking super
arm - which will destroy Cut Man in a couple hits.
Rock beats scissors, after all.
Now I don’t think the idea is
perfect - it didn’t take long
for magazines to start sharing the
optimum route through the game -
but it was a start, and is absolutely
still the go-to cultural touchstone
for a game where you pick your
own order to undergo challenges.
Mega Man can be played as part of
the Mega Man Legacy Collection,
which contains all six original NES games.
Tetris is the perfect game.
I don’t mean it’s the best
game ever made, or anything.
But I mean it feels like a complete,
pure specimen - like a natural
property of the universe that was
discovered, rather than designed.
Like a Rubik’s cube, a chess
board, or Ryan Gosling.
But the aspect I want to focus on is the
interesting way it handles difficulty.
Because as the game goes on - with
you manically trying to drop blocks
into perfect lines - the game ramps up
the challenge in two different ways.
The first way is that the speed increases
after you clear a certain number of lines.
This is a sort of ‘artificial difficulty’
- the designer essentially reaching in
and tweaking the numbers to make your life harder.
But the second way is what you
might call ‘diegetic difficulty’.
Basically: the more blocks there are on screen,
the less time it takes for new blocks
to fall, and the harder it is to play.
The game becomes more difficult, as
a natural outcome of the play space.
It arises from the rules of the
game’s universe - hence, diegetic.
You can see a similar thing in a game like Snake,
where the longer your body grows, the
harder it is to avoid crashing into it.
It’s an elegant way to make a game more difficult
in a way that is clearly visible
and immediately understandable.
You can play Tetris in your browser.
But you might as well play the beautiful
modern reimagining, Tetris Effect.
There’s so much you could say about
the influence and importance of Doom.
It was a pioneer in 3D graphics, online
deathmatch, shareware, cheat codes,
community-driven map-making, and it was
so formative for the first person shooter
genre that similar games were all called
"Doom-clones" for about half a decade.
But this isn’t supposed to be a history lesson.
And, luckily, Doom is more than
a stuffy old historical artefact.
In fact - it’s still wildly fun to play in 2024.
And that’s because - among other
reasons - the game is fast.
Doomguy whips around the environment like
the dude’s on rocket powered roller-skates.
Where many modern shooters feature
flat-footed characters who run out
stamina while jogging towards cover points,
Doom’s protagonist is lighting quick, which
makes encounters feel frenetic and fast-paced.
And that plays perfectly with the enemies,
who all play with space and position.
Like the biting pinky - you’ll want to
keep a lot of space between you and them.
Or the imp’s meandering fireball projectiles,
which can be dodged with fancy footwork.
There’s so much to learn from Doom.
But at the end of the day,
it’s just a really fun game.
It’s available on Steam and the major consoles.
With the Metroid franchise - which really found
its footing in 1994’s Super Metroid - Nintendo
stumbled upon a powerfully potent gameplay loop:
one that centres on the joy of exploration.
The game takes place on the planet Zebes - which
is not split up into distinct levels or worlds.
Instead, it’s a single, contiguous
play-space - a non-linear,
interconnected ant farm of
corridors and elevators.
Then again, your travel is often impeded by
obstacles like doors that require special
missiles or superheated rooms that will burn
you alive if you stick around for too long.
So… go explore elsewhere, and hopefully you’ll
find a new power-up: maybe some missiles,
or hi-jump boots, a grapple beam, an ice beam,
or an insulated suit that can withstand heat.
Now you can travel back to
that obstacle and overcome it.
That might reward you with a handy upgrade.
Or it might reveal the next chunk of the map.
So through this repeating loop of explore
and unlock, Super Metroid is all about using
exploration, and your memory of the world map,
to slowly unpick a giant knot of locks and keys.
Until you find your way to the final boss.
It is a wonderfully satisfying formula that has
sustained an entire genre of
so-called Metroidvania games -
from PS1 favourite Symphony of the Night,
to modern indie gems like Hollow Knight.
Super Metroid is available
on the Switch Online service.
For some of the older games on this
list, you might have to cast your
mind back to the 80s or 90s to truly
understand what made them so special.
But for Pokemon Blue, it would be very helpful
if you could actually time travel back to 1996.
Because, sure, Pokemon is a cute
little RPG in its own right.
It’s a game about catching
monsters, training them up,
teaching them moves, and then doing
battle with other Pokemon trainers.
And you’ll need to think about elemental
pair-ups, as grass-type monsters will
mop the floor with water-types, but get
burnt to a cinder by fire-based critters.
But what made Pokemon so special
was the fact that you could trade
monsters from one Game Boy to
another, using a link cable.
To encourage this, Pokemon was split
into two games - Red and Blue - which
are almost identical except for a number
of Pokemon that are exclusive to each game.
So if you want Vulpix or Electabuzz,
you’ll need a link cable.
Other Pokemon would only
evolve after being traded.
And the starter Pokemon never
show up again in your game,
so you’ll need to beg your
friend for their Bulbasaur.
Pokemon is an excellent example of
building community around a game,
not just through competition, but through
trading and helping each other out.
Pokémon Blue Version is sadly not easy to
play today, but it’s also not recommended
you walk up to a 10 year old and ask
if they want to see your Geodude.
So maybe check out a more recent
version and use your imagination
for what it would be like to trade
these things on the school playground.
In my mind, two games really defined the jump to
fully 3D gameplay: Super Mario 64 and Tomb Raider.
And both were about jumping around tricky
three-dimensional obstacle courses.
But, then again, they worked
in very different ways.
Mario is all about fluidity,
speed, and bouncy trampoline jumps.
Whereas Tomb Raider is about
positioning, patience, and precision.
Making your way through these ancient ruins is
almost like navigating a submarine
or setting up an elaborate machine.
You must observe the environment and execute
moves perfectly to get Lara Croft from A to B.
Today, in a world of games where characters
magnetically snap to ledges and automatically
clamber up walls, this sort of precise
movement can feel antiquated and frustrating.
But once you get into it, and feel the
satisfaction of overcoming a bunch of obstacles,
you realise that there’s something to be
gained by making movement more involved.
Tomb Raider can be played on all platforms,
as part of a remaster that
features all three PS1 games.
You can press a single button to revert
the game back to its original style.
Resident Evil was certainly not
the first survival horror game.
In fact, many of its ideas were inspired by
Alone in the Dark - including the
iconic fixed camera perspective.
But, hey, one game led to a thriving franchise
of critically acclaimed games and
the other led to an Uwe Boll movie.
So, here we are.
There are plenty of ways that Resident Evil
made players feel scared and unsettled.
From the aforementioned camera
angle, to the clunky movement,
to good ol’ fashioned jump scares.
But the one I want to point
out is the way Resident Evil
simply restricts how much stuff you can have.
Key items like ammunition
and healing herbs are rare,
which means you can’t blast
your gun at anything that moves.
Instead you need to carefully conserve ammo,
consider every shot, and sometimes
choose to just run away from enemies.
And then there’s the inventory
- a tiny cramped grid.
Instead of carrying about an
entire arsenal of different guns,
you have to think carefully about
what items you need right now.
It's a perfect lesson in how a designer
can make a player feel empowered,
or disempowered, simply by turning
the big dial labelled "resources".
Resident Evil is hard to play outside
of using original hardware in 2024,
so feel free to check out the impressive HD
remake which is available on all major platforms.
Valve’s Half-Life tells a complete story…
but without ever stopping for a cutscene.
The game follows Gordon Freeman - a nerdy
scientist who gets caught up in an alien invasion.
He’ll have to fight monsters, solve
puzzles, fend off the military,
and even spend a bit of time on
the aliens’ home planet of Xen.
But the game’s narrative innovation is that this
whole thing takes place from Gordon’s perspective.
And in real-time - without breaks,
level transitions, or cutscenes.
This gives the game an immersive
and grounded feel which operates
on the strengths of video games - rather
than simply copying what works in movies.
So when characters talk to you -
they look directly into the camera.
When explosions happen, they feel more impactful
because they’re happening in real time.
And the game never takes away
your control or sense of agency.
This might feel a little trite, seeing as a lot
of first-person shooter games now
feature flashy cinematic set-pieces.
But it all goes back to Half-Life, and that
slow tram ride into the heart of Black Mesa.
The game’s on Steam.
And, obviously, play Half-Life 2 as well.
Thief: The Dark Project follows
burglar Garrett into mansions,
cathedrals, and any other place
that might hide valuable treasure.
And because Garrett is not much of a fighter,
you’ll need to focus on sneaking past
enemies if you want to get back out alive.
This means reading the environment,
and using it to your advantage.
And that operates on two axes.
You’ve got light - you’ll be spotted in
bright areas, so stick to the shadows.
And sound - echoey surfaces
can give your footsteps away,
so walk on grass and carpet where possible.
This makes for a game about patient
observation, where you look, listen,
and try to figure out what
the guards are thinking.
But you can also manipulate the environment to
your own needs - perhaps using a water arrow to
douse a torch, or a moss arrow to create
an impromptu rug to hush your footsteps.
Thief: The Dark Project is
available on Steam as Thief Gold.
I think there’s a lot to learn
about game design from the arcade.
These games can’t rely on complex stories,
long campaigns, or in-depth gameplay.
They need to hook you immediately,
explain their gameplay in seconds,
and incentivise you to come back and try
again when you’ve got more pocket money.
All good lessons for game
designers to have up their sleeve.
Take Crazy Taxi - Sega’s
bonkers driving game from 1999.
The game has you zig-zagging
around a San Francisco-style city,
trying to make as many taxi journeys
as possible within a matter of minutes.
So you pick up passengers, and then
speed them to their destination.
The faster you get them there,
the more money you earn.
But you can also get a bigger
tip by pulling off stunts,
tricks, and driving recklessly along the way.
And then time’s up, and the game’s over.
Producer Kenji Kanno says "the whole point of the
game is to have a lot of fun in a short
period of time", and I totally agree.
It’s my go-to example of a game with an extremely
simple, but utterly concentrated, gameplay loop.
Crazy Taxi is available on
Steam, but this version is
sadly missing the product placement
and the iconic original soundtrack.
So Thief was part of a legacy of immersive sims.
These were games that used
complex systems - like physics
and artificial intelligence - to simulate a world.
And would then immerse you in that world,
through a first person perspective,
and realistic interactions.
So… simulations that were
immersive - hence, ‘immersive sim’.
But in 2000, designer Warren Spector and
his team added a while new side to the term.
In Deus Ex - a globe-trotting cyberpunk spy
thriller about conspiracies - the idea is that
the player is able to tackle objectives
in just about whatever way they want.
So you can play the game as a first
person shooter, like Half-Life.
Or you can take the stealthy approach and
sneak around in the shadows, like Thief.
You can play it more like an adventure game,
as you chat to characters and
negotiate for information.
Or you can treat it like an RPG, as
you level up skills in lock-picking,
hacking, swimming, and so
on, to unlock more routes.
All of this led to a game of
overwhelming player freedom.
A game where levels are open-ended playspaces with
endless routes and solutions - and it’s
up to the player to direct the action.
According to Spector, "the game had to be
about how clever and creative players were,
not how clever and creative
we, as developers, were".
Deus Ex has inspired a litany of
fantastic games - like Dishonored
and Prey - that also work to empower the player.
But the incredible original
is still available on Steam.
If you’re looking for someone to blame for the
skill trees that show up in every modern game,
look no further than Blizzard’s Diablo II.
This game is a highly concentrated RPG which
puts the focus almost exclusively on combat,
and on powering up your character.
Every time you get enough experience points
to level up, you don’t just have a chance to
boost your stats like attack and dexterity - but
you also get to choose a node on a skill tree.
Each one of these is a handy new ability
- either a move you perform actively,
or a passive buff that’s
helping in the background.
And each new skill can dramatically
change how your character works.
Like, the Necromancer starts out with the
ability to turn a dead body into a friendly
skeleton buddy, but 5 or so hours later you’ll
have a whole army of skeletons, a clay golem,
and an undead mage working alongside you, while
you rip apart your enemies with powerful spells.
And it’s this feeling - going from powerless rube
to overpowered god - that makes Diablo
II so fun, and so hard to put down.
You want to see the effect of just one more skill.
You want to get just a little more powerful.
Being able to see the whole skill tree is also
hugely important: much of your time is spent
simply reading what later upgrades will do and
dreaming of the time you’ll finally unlock it.
The original Diablo II is available on Battle.net,
but requires a little jiggery pokery
to get working on modern machines.
So feel free to play the remastered
version if you want an easy life.
After the success of SimCity - a city-building
simulation game about urban planning - designer
Will Wright decided to zoom in, and
make a game about individual households.
And he called it The Sims.
So we ended up with a game that follows the lives
of a user-created family of digitised humans.
And the game acts like an ant farm - you can
just watch these people go about their day,
using smart utility AI to autonomously
fulfil their needs and desires.
Or you can reach in and exert control.
For some players, The Sims
was about telling stories,
and using the simulation
gameplay as a means for creation.
For others, The Sims was about playing
god - putting the sims in strange and
uncomfortable situations, or torturing
them with a capricious flick of the mouse.
Pretty much everyone who has played The Sims
has sent a sim into the swimming
pool… and then deleted the ladder.
But this was the joy of The Sims
- it was whatever you made of it.
20 years later, The Sims still remains an
essential touchstone for player-led game design.
The original game can be found
on abandonware websites - but
the very good The Sims 3 is available
more easily on Steam, if you prefer.
Grand Theft Auto III and its sequels might be best
known for their many, many media controversies.
But when it comes to game design, GTA is best know
for popularising the idea of an open world game.
Pretty much every game that
takes place in a giant,
contiguous city has to pay a debt of
influence to Rockstar and Liberty City.
But GTA actually does something that
most open world games still get wrong.
You see, the game has missions - which
are carefully scripted levels with goals,
cutscenes, fail states, and rewards.
And doing these will advance the
story and unlock more of the world.
But between those missions, the game encourages
you to simply run riot, and let off steam.
You can drive off ramps to do stunts.
Steal an ambulance and become a paramedic.
Or simply get into a ridiculous
city-wide car chase with the police.
In other open world games, there’s either
little of interest to do in the open world,
or the story and fantasy
precludes you from causing chaos.
But by making you a criminal, and filling the
city with opportunities for mischief and mayhem,
Grand Theft Auto allows for
unadulterated sandbox thrills.
It’s sadly only available as the iffy,
Definitive Edition, ‘remaster’ these days.
But you can get a surprisingly good
version of GTA 3 on iOS and Android.
I sometimes like to talk about
how games feel on the thumbs.
How the simple joy of interacting with a mouse or
controller can feel deeply, inherently satisfying.
So whether that’s pulling off a
flaming uppercut in Street Fighter,
snaking in Mario Kart DS,
or bunnyhopping in Quake,
these kinaesthetic qualities can
elevate a game to a higher level of fun.
For me, though nothing beats Tony Hawk’s
Pro Skater 3, and other games in the series.
These anarchic, score-chasing skateboarding games
are filled with quirky little inputs
that feel satisfying to pull off.
For one, there are the tricks, which you unleash
by pressing a button and a
direction simultaneously.
Then there’s the manual which is achieved with
a tasty up-down twitch of the analogue stick.
And then there’s the revert, which is
achieved by slamming a shoulder button
at the exact moment your board
hits the wood of a half pipe.
Do these tricks - and others, like grinds
and board flips - in a continuous combo,
and you’ll feel like a gaming god.
There are few games where I can boot
them up - even after being away for
years - and just instantly
slip back into the groove.
I can’t ride a skateboard for toffee in real life,
but I’ll never forget how to trick in Tony Hawk’s.
Sadly, the only games easily
available as of now are in a
remake collection featuring the first two games.
So you’ll have to make do with those if
you’re not willing to do a little work.
Developer Fumito Ueda is fond of a game-making
approach called ‘Design by Subtraction’,
which is all about removing extraneous
elements to get at the core of the game.
He was inspired by the French title Another
World - a cinematic adventure that did away
with typical video game elements like the user
interface, score system, health bar, and lives.
And it even got rid of dialogue.
Instead, it depicted the relationship between
two characters entirely through actions.
If you’ve played Ico, that
probably sounds familiar.
The game is about escorting a princess through
a castle filled with monsters - but you can’t
speak each other’s language, so have to
rely on input and actions to get along.
You can hold Yorda’s hand, give her vague
commands, and bat away enemies to keep her safe.
Your relationship grows throughout the game, but
is cemented when she’s taken away for a while.
Yorda, after all, grants you the ability to
save your game - wso hen she’s gone, there’s
no way to lock in your progress, and you’ll
have to do the whole next section in one go.
Ico showed me the power of saying
and doing less - and I can see its
influence in so many games released since.
Sadly you’ll have to seek out Ico
on PS2 or PS3 to play it today.
Once you’ve done that, though, make sure you
play Ueda’s other games - the incredible Shadow
of the Colossus, and the - well,
interesting The Last Guardian.
Tetsuya Mizuguchi is one of gaming’s
most interesting designers because,
for much of his career, he’s focused on
achieving one goal: syncing up music,
visuals, and gameplay to put players
in a trance-like state of synesthesia.
Perhaps his most successful attempt is Rez
- an on-rails shooter where blasting enemies
creates sound effects which dynamically
synchronise with the background music.
Mizuguchi explains that "the rhythms of play
would always be synched, and play would feel good.
When we first made this work, it felt like magic."
And it’s true! Rez is not a
complex game by any means,
but there’s something truly
meditative and engrossing about it.
Especially when you play it in the dark,
with a good set of headphones on, and - if
you’re feeling spicy - the trance vibrator
peripheral nestled somewhere on your person.
It’s perhaps even better in VR, so if you
can’t track down the Dreamcast original,
check out Rez Infinite on your headset.
While the Resident Evil games focused on
campy B-movie horror - all rubber suit
monsters and haunted houses - the Silent Hill
games were going for something more… cerebral.
Silent Hill 2, for instance,
focuses on psychological horror, that stems
from the protagonist’s trauma and guilt.
This is achieved in many ways, but
perhaps the most effective is in the
design of the titular town itself - Silent Hill.
Because the layout of this place,
and the way you move through it,
can be more unsettling than
any creature or monster.
This is achieved through long, quiet
hallways that slowly build a sense of unease.
Through rooms that have scary noises,
but no actual monsters, which
keeps you on edge at all times.
And through the dense fog that
hangs over the whole town,
making it impossible to know what’s too far ahead.
But I think my favourite touch is the
way the game deals with verticality.
There are sections where protagonist
James Sunderland travels down - maybe
going down a staircase or jumping into a dark pit.
And then he goes down again. And again.
And at some point you realise: I
shouldn’t be able to go down this deep.
That’s not how buildings work.
It defies logic and physics.
But then again, Silent Hill
was never really logical,
because the town is ultimately a
metaphor for James’s tortured mind.
And as the one running around
this psychological space,
you’re right there with him,
living through his trauma.
Spooky stuff!
Silent Hill 2 is unfortunately not
available on any current platforms,
so you’ll have to unearth a
PlayStation 2 to play it today.
Right now we’re in the midst
of a cozy game revolution.
Every other indie developer is making a
comforting little game without combat,
time limits, fail states, or challenges.
But if there’s a patient zero for
this viral outbreak in coziness,
it’s probably Animal Crossing.
This game casts you as a villager in a town
filled with animal critters and it
leaves you to just… live your life.
You can buy furniture for your house,
dig up fossils and catch fish, chat
to your neighbours, and send letters.
The game is full of objectives
and things to do but, crucially,
there’s no pressure to finish
any of them anytime soon.
Because sure, it’s a familiar
meme that Tom Nook is a ruthless
landlord who has trapped you in an
infinite mortgage repayment scheme -
but find me a real-world bank that
doesn’t mind if you never actually
pay off your home and I’ll transfer
my mortgage to them immediately.
Animal Crossing also works hard to
force you into a leisurely pace.
You cannot binge through the game’s content
as some stuff only happens once a day,
and shops open and close at specific hours.
Where some designers never want you to stop
playing their game, Animal Crossing shows
that there’s real value in giving players
a reason to switch off and touch grass.
Playing Animal Crossing will require you
to dig out a Gamecube but, in all honesty,
you’ll get a similar experience
playing the latest version on Switch.
Making a game is hard.
Now imagine making 200 of them.
But that’s the idea behind WarioWare - a
rapid-fire micro game collection where the
player needs to see, understand, and complete a
microscopic video game in a matter of seconds.
That might involve directing
a finger up a man’s nose,
catching a falling stick, or deploying an air bag.
Each game is a tiny weeny masterclass in design.
Because imagine making a video game where you have
to communicate how to play in the blink of an eye.
So each micro game must express
its idea through colour, shape,
composition, and a single-word prompt
like ‘bounce’, ‘catch’, or ‘jump’.
But the real thrill is playing
these things back to back,
as you must be ready to change
your skills every 4 seconds.
You play WarioWare games in a heightened grip,
ready to test your reactions and reflexes.
There’s almost nothing like WarioWare
- outside of its many sequels.
But I think it’s a beautiful idea for a game,
and an excellent reference point for getting
the most out of the absolute tiniest idea.
It’s available on Switch Online.
I wanted to include at least one game on this list
that fits into the category
of serious game, or newsgame.
These are games that comment on serious,
political, or newsworthy topics - using
game mechanics and systems to make a point.
September 12th is perhaps
the most famous of the bunch.
The game features a middle eastern village that’s
occupied by both terrorists
and innocent civilians.
The game asks you to drop bombs on the
terrorists but it quickly becomes clear
that it’s impossible to attack them without
accidentally killing civilians in the explosion.
What’s more, other villagers
will mourn the dead and some
will be turned into terrorists themselves.
It’s up to the player to realise
that nothing good can come of this
approach and the only way to win,
so to speak, is to stop playing.
September 12th is the perfect example of how a
game can be used to provoke thoughts and debate.
And a reminder that video games don’t have to be
fun - their interactivity can also
be used to make a serious point.
You can play it in your browser.
Game design is inextricably linked to failure.
Unlike other forms of entertainment,
games are built around the idea that
you can lose, fail, die, and screw up.
Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time
was one of the first games I played
that really explored this idea -
both mechanically and narratively.
In terms of mechanically, the Prince has access
to a magic hourglass that lets you rewind time,
so any mistakes made in the game’s tricky
platforming challenges can be undone.
It’s perhaps only a slight twist
on the typical checkpoint or save
state systems but it puts power into
the player’s hands and makes fixing
your failures a precious resource
that the player can spend or save.
But then there’s the narrative side.
The whole game is given a meta-textual
twist as it’s actually a bedtime story,
told by the Prince himself.
And so any deaths are explained away as
a simple mistake in the storytelling.
Now. Okay. I’m not sure how that actually works.
Imagine telling a story about your last
holiday where you say "and then I fell
into some spikes and died… oh wait,
hold on, that’s not what happened".
But hey, it hung a lampshade on one of gaming’s
weirdest quirks in a way that
I still reference to this day.
Sands of Time is on Steam.
Katamari Damacy is a charming and
imaginative game... about garbage.
The game is about a pint-size prince
who must roll up giant balls of garbage,
to recreate the stars and moons that
his dad destroyed in a drunken bender.
So you start small - picking up
staples, thumbtacks, and erasers.
Before moving on to picking up
cars, elephants, and people.
And then buildings, bridges, and giant squid.
That constant power creep, that feeling
of getting stronger and stronger,
is always fun in games - but
now it’s visible and tactile.
It’s just joyful to start
out small and end up big.
To look back and see how far you’ve come.
Designer Keita Takahashi focused on
four key pillars for the game - novelty,
ease of understanding, enjoyment, and humour.
And if you ask me, he nailed the lot of them.
Katamari Damacy is available on all
platforms, as part of the REROLL remaster.
The humble scoring system, which showed up in most
arcade games, fell out of favour by the mid 2000s.
It was deemed archaic, and - in a world of
more cinematic games - kinda video-gamey.
Ew, gross.
But Devil May Cry 3 shows
that, when used carefully,
a score can elevate a game and push
players to truly engage with a piece.
So DMC features a complex combat system with
all sorts of different moves
that require intricate inputs.
And these moves can be chained
together for non-stop combos.
And you can even swap weapons mid-way
through a combo to unleash even more attacks.
Which is… a lot to ask of players! But
you don’t need to know half of this stuff
to get through the game - you can simply
fumble your way through most encounters.
But that’s where the scoring system comes in.
Your combat prowess is ranked based on how stylish
you are - from Dope, all the way to SSStylish.
With three Ss.
To get the best grade, then, you’ll need
to show full understanding of the system
by performing the hardest moves, keeping your
attacks varied, and never dropping your combo.
Devil May Cry 3 is best on PlayStation 2,
but you can also get it as part of the
DMC HD Collection on all major platforms.
I could give a dozen reasons
for playing Resident Evil 4.
But lemme stick to just one: the
game’s perfect sense of pacing.
For the most part, Resident Evil 4 is
a series of chaotic pitched battles.
Perhaps best seen in the game’s opening
tussle in which Leon is trapped in a
tiny village filled with zombified farmhands.
And - oh yeah, a crazed dude with a sack
on his head and a chainsaw in his hands.
This is a tense, no-holds barred encounter
that will leave your palms sweaty.
But then it mixes things up.
A bit of downtime, perhaps, with puzzles to solve,
or locations to scout, or items to scavenge.
Or a cutscene - a campy action-flick story beat.
Or maybe a bit of time shopping as you upgrade
your items and rearrange your attache case.
Or maybe it’s a boss fight - an epic
showdown with some ugly zombified nasty.
This is a masterclass in keeping the player
engaged: as soon as one idea, enemy type, or
location starts to wear out its welcome, Resident
Evil 4 changes things up and tries something new.
You never become bored or overstimulated.
Which makes it genuinely hard
to put down the controller.
There’s so much else to
love about Resident Evil 4.
But you’ll have to play it
yourself to truly appreciate it.
Start with the 2005 original, available on
all major platforms - and then check out the
2023 remake to see how Capcom updated
the game for today’s sensibilities.
When the Xbox 360 launched in late 2005,
it came with a feature that would go on to
define a new type of game - and would change the
fortunes of a handful of now famous developers.
Because if you got sick of
such great launch titles as,
uhm, Amped 3 or, errr, NHL 2K6, you could
pop into the Xbox Live Arcade and download small,
cheap, time-waster games like Zuma, Bejeweled 2,
and - my favourite - Geometry Wars: Retro Evolved.
This is a twin stick shooter, where
the two analogue sticks take care of
moving around the screen,
and blasting your enemies.
This allows for masterful
movement through the environment.
You can run away from enemies, while
still shooting in their direction.
And bobbing, weaving, and slicing
through waves of enemies just feels good.
Of course, the twin stick genre
wasn’t new - Geometry Wars is
basically just a pimped out version
of Robotron: 2084 from the early 80s.
But what made Geometry Wars
stand out was the presentation.
The polish. What we’d now call: juice
The game explodes with colour, and dead
enemies erupt into messy particle fountains.
When you launch a bomb it
literally warps the playfield,
which sells the impact of that explosion.
Pair it up with a thumping techno soundtrack and
you can see why this… had to give way to this…
Of course, there are many games
to study if you want to learn
about juice - most notably the work of Vlambeer.
But Geometry Wars was the first
game I played where I realised that
the presentation was sucking me in,
just as much as the gameplay itself.
You can get Geometry Wars on Steam and Xbox.
Time limits are one of the most interesting -
but challenging things to toy with in games.
Take Dead Rising. This zombie apocalypse
game is built around a ticking clock.
You’ve got to survive for 72 hours
before a helicopter comes to pick you
up - and you can feel this time limit
hanging over your head at all times.
So, you can’t just waste time
endlessly killing zombies:
you need to get on and make
a move with the main quest.
You also realise that you can’t
save every NPC - each one will
be killed at the end of a timer, so
unless you move at super sonic speed,
you’re going to have to pick and
choose who you can lead to safety.
Getting better at the game means
managing your time more efficiently.
And learning the layout of the game’s shopping
mall so you can move more effectively.
So the time limit adds to the sensation
of being in a fraught situation.
But… it can also be a drag, and
in every game with a time limit,
there are plenty of players who moan about it, or
ask for it to be removed through a cheat or mod.
Therefore, I recommend you play Dead Rising and
decide for yourself - does the timer
add to the experience, or detract?
Sometimes, the most polarising
games are helpful in letting
you decide which side of the fence you fall on.
Dead Rising is available on
Steam, Xbox, and PlayStation.
There’s a lot to say about Call of Duty 4.
The campaign is filled with great designs - like a
training facility which will suggest a difficulty
level, based on how well you perform, and a tense
stealth mission set in the Ukraine wilderness.
But also some stuff that’s… perhaps fallen
out of favour, like regenerating health,
highly scripted set-piece levels,
and infinitely re-spawning enemies.
But the one aspect I’d like to point
at is the perks system in multiplayer.
Call of Duty cleverly took
aspects from RPG games - like
stats and level ups - and applied
them to an online shooter.
So now, each battle you fight
will earn you experience points
that can be spent on new guns, kill
streak rewards, perks, and so on.
None of these give you an outright advantage
over the enemy - each one has disadvantages
and counters - but they let you create a highly
personalised load-out that fits your play style.
This gives the online multiplayer
a true sense of progression.
Battles aren’t just fun throw-downs, but each
one brings you a little closer to that cool perk,
or that handy laser sight that you can slap
on top of your favourite assault rifle.
It made the online gameplay
crazy compelling - in fact,
it’s so much fun that the top reward
is the ability to "prestige" - i.e,
reset your level back to zero so you
get the joy of unlocking it all again.
Call of Duty 4 is available on Steam,
and other stores as a remaster.
But, in truth, you can play pretty much any
Call of Duty game and get the same experience.
Portal has a lot of lessons for game designers.
Lessons about how games can tell
jokes, purely through game mechanics.
How puzzles are designed.
How a small idea can be expanded into a full game.
How playtesting can be used.
And how, sometimes, less is more.
But the aspect I want to focus on here,
is how new game ideas can come around
by mushing together disparate genres.
Because Portal is a puzzle game - all
about making logical leaps and clever
connections - but you solve those puzzles
with the tools of a first person shooter.
So you can run around in 3D space,
and you get a portal gun which you
can aim and fire like a weapon.
This opens up interesting new puzzle avenues about
careful aiming, and about movement and momentum.
It even introduces a little light combat - but
it’s more about outsmarting your
enemies than fighting them head on.
It also makes the genre approachable to an
audience that might not have considered puzzles.
By setting it in the Half-Life universe
and giving you a, quote-unquote, gun,
Portal snuck its way into the
hearts of FPS players, as well.
But there's one more aspect of Portal
that makes it an essential teaching tool:
the developer's commentary, where Valve
designers explain how they made the game.
Listening to this kicked off my obsession with
learning about game design and, to be honest,
Game Maker's Toolkit probably wouldn't
exist if I didn't stumble upon this feature.
Portal is on Steam and Switch.
Mass Effect - a sprawling sci-fi RPG from BioWare
- is all about responding to the player’s choices.
You can change Shepard from a heroic
Paragon to a selfish Renegade,
and start romantic relationships with
one - or more - of your party members.
But the game also reacts to your choices
by making significant changes to the plot.
For instance - at one point, you’ll
find that Krogan party member Wrex
is vehemently against your plan to
destroy a Krogan breeding facility.
You might be able to talk him
around and get him onside.
Or the conversation might end in a
violent shoot-out that leaves Wrex dead.
He’s now permanently removed as a party member.
But what’s more - he won’t appear
in Mass Effect 2 or 3, either.
Because, at the risk of spoiling the
sanctity of this meaningless YouTube list,
you really need to play all three Mass
Effect games to the get true impact.
Seeing how your decisions ripple out across
three massive games is quite remarkable.
And while BioWare sadly couldn’t stick
the ending in the third entry - though,
how could it satisfy every possible choice
you’ve made over 100 hours of gameplay? - it’s
still an amazing feat to allow players
to have such unique and personal stories.
The Mass Effect games are available in a
well-regarded remastered Legendary Edition on PC,
Xbox, and PlayStation, but you can also get
the original games on Steam if you prefer.
Maybe it’s a little indulgent to talk
about two skateboarding games on this list.
But I think it’s fascinating to see how Tony
Hawk’s and Skate approach the sport
in two completely different ways.
Because where Tony Hawk’s is
a bonkers score-chasing arcade
gem that ignores the rules of physics,
Skate is more grounded and realistic.
One way it achieves this is with an
innovative control scheme that makes you
mimic the action of kicking a skateboard,
by wiggling the right analogue stick.
So, just like how you ollie in real
life by pushing the board down,
and then kicking the lip back up, you jump in
Skate by flicking the stick down, and then up.
More complex tricks come from more
complicated inputs on the analogue stick.
It’s difficult - but that’s the point.
In Tony Hawk’s it’s hard to do a
900 degree spin over a helicopter.
In Skate it’s hard to jump down a five step
staircase without rupturing your spleen.
Playing both Tony Hawk’s and Skate
is a fantastic lesson in how you
can tackle a topic from vastly different angles.
And it makes you wonder whether there are
different ways to approach the other sports.
What if football games were less like
FIFA, and more like Rocket League?
Skate is available on the Xbox store.
Multiplayer games are balanced around counters.
No matter what character,
move, or strategy you pick,
the other player can respond with
an option that will shut you down.
And in Team Fortress 2, that extends to a
complex interlocking web of nine different
character classes, who all have strengths
and weaknesses when fighting each other.
Like… the engineer’s turrets
are great at stopping scouts,
but the demoman’s grenades
can quickly destroy a turret.
Then again, the speedy scout is
perfect for downing the demoman.
And then the spy can sap the
turret or backstab a sniper,
but the pyro’s flame can quickly
disable a spy’s disguise.
And then the heavy… well, you get the point.
This is rock, paper, scissors
in four dimensions, people.
And so after nearly 20 years, Team
Fortress 2 is still great fun,
and still a great example of how to keep a complex
multiplayer game feeling balanced and fair.
You can get it on Steam, for free.
There’s so much to learn from BioShock.
But the one aspect I want to
focus on here is the audio diary.
So this game takes place in Rapture -
a striking underwater metropolis that
was supposed to be a utopia
for the rich and intelligent.
But, as so often happens with these things,
it turned into a nightmare and now
everyone is dead, or utterly deranged.
Which can make storytelling a little tricky.
So the designers of BioShock
used a clever narrative device:
cassette tapes that were recorded
during Rapture’s downfall - and
then left scattered about the
city after everyone disappeared.
This way, the player is able to learn about the
world of Rapture by finding
and listening to these logs.
It adds an archeological twist to
proceedings as you feel like you’re
unearthing the past and piecing
together the narrative yourself.
These logs can also tell side stories, flesh out
character backgrounds, and explain bits of lore.
Now, BioShock didn’t invent the audio diary
- they’re a mix of System Shock’s emails,
Metroid Prime’s scan logs, and
Metal Gear Solid’s codec calls.
But BioShock’s implementation
was perfect and inspired a huge
number of games to add in their own audio diaries.
And they led to games that told their
story entirely through found objects.
But, we’ll come back to that.
BioShock is available on Steam,
and on consoles as a remaster.
Burnout was already a pretty perfect game.
It’s an arcade racer where the way to win
is to literally crush the competition.
Smashing, squeezing, and splintering nearby
cars doesn’t just put them out of the race for a
second, but nets you a nitrous boost that you can
use to fling forward - and into your next target.
But Burnout Paradise then took the
formula and plopped it into an open world.
Now, remember - this was back when such
a prospect was a delight, not a threat.
And so what we get is a game that never stops.
You are always in your car, always
racing, and always smashing.
You can just pull up to a stop sign and
start a race - or you can simply bomb around,
break through signs, fly over
jumps, or hunt down special cars.
Same goes for the social aspects.
Sure, you can pull in friends and
do multiplayer races and events
but competition is simply weaved
into the world thanks to a litany
of leaderboards - with each street noting
the fastest sprint and the biggest crash.
And where many open world games pen you
in during missions - with invisible walls
and frustrating fail states - Burnout Paradise
does not: the whole world is always open to you.
And so when a race takes
you from point A to point B,
you can take whichever route
suits you to get there.
Burnout Paradise is on all
platforms as a Remastered edition.
Far Cry 2 is all about friction.
Lemme list just some of the ways that this game
works to frustrate and rub up against the player.
So: your weapons get rusty and
can jam in the middle of combat.
You have malaria, and have to regularly
top up your medication so you
don’t just fall over and die.
To look at the map you have to hold up a piece of
paper - and the game doesn’t pause while doing so.
Wildfires can sweep away the dry grass
you were planning to use for cover.
And so on, and so on.
A lot of game design is about
endlessly playtesting a game
to remove elements that might
be annoying or off-putting.
It’s about shaving off the jagged edges,
providing "quality of life" features,
and secretly giving the player a helping hand.
But Far Cry 2 proves that the opposite can
also lead to incredible gameplay experiences.
Playing this game truly feels like being
a lone mercenary in a hostile country.
You feel outgunned,
underpowered, scared, and alone.
Far Cry 2 is on Steam and Xbox.
It’s also well worth playing the later Far
Cry games which are fun in their own right,
but are also opposite to Far
Cry 2 is almost every way.
You’ll learn a lot about design - and your
own preferences - by playing
Far Cry 2 and 3 back to back.
Left 4 Dead pits a team of survivors
against a team of distinct zombie
monsters - like a big fat bloke that
explodes into a cloud of bile when shot.
Or a dude who can wrap you
up in his snake-like tongue.
But perhaps the most interesting
character of all, is one you never see.
Behind the scenes, "The Director" is an
AI system that works to dynamically alter
the game’s pace, difficulty, and dramatic tension.
So, the director spawns in mobs of zombies,
and places down special infected monsters.
But then it keeps track of each
player’s level of intensity.
Is the player low of health? Being incapacitated
by a smoker? Or has just spent
a lot of time shooting zombies?
When the intensity hits its peak, the director
starts a relax phase where no zombies spawn.
And maybe secretly adds some pills
and ammo to nearby pick-up areas, too.
And once it’s sure the players have caught their
breath, it starts to build up the intensity again.
This innovative system works to keep
the game interesting and engaging,
specifically by reacting to the
player’s current state - proving
that difficulty and pace don’t have
to be set once, before the game ships.
Instead, they can ebb and flow
based on what the player is doing.
Left 4 Dead is available on Steam.
And so is Left 4 Dead 2, where the
director gains the ability to change
entire chunks of level layout
in response to player actions.
Remember when I talked about Rogue?
Like seven hours ago? Well, in 2008,
designer Derek Yu had a super smart idea.
He realised that Rogue’s most important bits -
the randomly generated levels and the punishing
permadeath - didn’t need to be in turn-based,
tile-based games about crawling through dungeons.
And so in Spelunky, he put
those ideas… into a platfomer.
And, suddenly, we get a fresh
new twist on a familiar genre.
Where a lot of platformers are about repeating
the same level as you slowly learn the exact
right time to jump over each gap, Spelunky’s
procedurally generated levels mean you can’t
rely on memory or repetition - you have
to simply improve your baseline skills.
You need to get better at jumping, at dealing with
enemies, at blowing up walls, and dropping ropes.
Spelunky would kick off a whole
new era of roguelikes - inspiring
hundreds of games in all
sorts of different genres.
And while each one holds
interesting lessons - like,
should your progress persist from run to run?
And how can you tell an interesting story in a
game that keeps resetting? - Spelunky is
worth playing to see how things started.
And also because it’s just incredibly fun.
Spelunky Classic from 2008 is
available for free - but you
might want to check out the excellent HD
remake, which is on all major platforms.
Also read Derek Yu's book
about the making of Spelunky,
which is an incredible resource
for would-be game designers.
I talked a little bit about diegetic
interfaces, when I mentioned Far Cry 2's map.
But the reigning king of this
idea is definitely Dead Space.
This sci-fi horror game is all about immersion.
And it achieves this through a bunch of
different ways - including its impeccable
sound design, and by never taking
away your control for a cutscene.
But the most memorable feature is the
way the game displays its entire
interface within the game world.
So Isaac Clark's health bar is a giant
gauge on the back of his space suit.
His current ammo count is displayed on each gun.
The inventory, FaceTime camera, and
shop screens are projected as holograms.
Dead Space will always be the go-to example
of how to hide a HUD in the game itself.
Dead Space is on Steam and Xbox, and there's
a fancy remake on everything bar Switch.
It became a meme - "this game
makes me feel like Batman".
Basically every review parroted the same
line, with the same sentiment - Batman:
Arkham Asylum actually let players
fulfil the fantasy of being Batman.
But that is ultimately the
game’s greatest strength.
Every decision in this game is pushing the
player towards feeling like the dark knight.
Whether that’s in the free-flow combat system,
where the game magnetically pulls Batman towards
nearby enemies and automatically
pulls off cool finishing moves.
Or it’s in the stealth sections, where guards
are told not to turn around or look up high,
so Batman can stalk his enemies like a panther.
There’s a reason why the Arkham games are now the
go-to reference point for comic book games - it’s
the gold standard that Marvel and DC want to hit
when making games based on other caped crusaders.
The game is available on Steam,
and on other platforms as part of
the Arkham Collection or Trilogy.
One of the best ways to learn about a genre is
to seek out the most simple
and succinct version of it.
A game that boils a complex set of systems
and mechanics down to its absolute basics.
Take Plants vs. Zombies - a cute
and casual tower defence game,
which is secretly a real-time strategy game.
But one that even an idiot like me can play.
So the game is about defending your
house from hordes of slow-moving
zombies, by placing down plants.
Each plant has a specific role
to play - from pea-shooting pods
to walnut barriers to plants
that launch globs of butter.
And each zombie has its own role too - there
are armoured zombies that can tank damage,
pole-vaulting zombies that can
leap over your defences, and more.
And on top of this there’s an economy.
Sunflowers are perhaps the most
important plant in the game,
as they generate the solar
currency needed to buy more stuff.
So while it’s tempting to go fully on
the offence, PvZ will teach you that
you need to balance your build between
attack power and economic productivity.
So while it’s not a true RTS, Plants vs.
Zombies has a lot to teach about unit types, enemy
differentiation, economy balancing, and more.
If you’re ever unsure about how a genre works,
find a game that boils it down to its
absolute essentials and start there.
Plants vs. Zombies is available on Steam and Xbox.
You could argue that the history of game design
is inextricably linked to the
history of controller design.
And so it’s always fascinating to see what games
arise when a new input method is introduced.
When Apple introduced the iPhone and iPad
developers had to figure out how to make games
that would work exclusively on a touchscreen
- no buttons, no analogue sticks, no d-pads.
And so game designers had to figure out how
to make a game work exclusively with a finger.
And my pick of the bunch would be Fruit Ninja.
It’s a simple game: a bunch of apples, pears,
bananas and coconuts are tossed up into the air.
And then you slash them to bits by
dragging your finger over the screen.
No one would confuse Fruit Ninja for a complicated
game but it’s still a lot of fun thanks, largely,
to that tactile way of interacting with the game.
It’s living proof that games need to be
designed around the way we interact with them,
and that game design cannot
be disconnected from hardware.
Fruit Ninja is available on iOS and Android.
Survival horror games have
historically made players
feel powerless by reducing your combat abilities.
Perhaps giving you crappy weapons like a plank of
wood, or reducing the amount of ammo you can find.
But with Amnesia, Frictional decided to go
one step further: remove combat altogether.
Now all you can do is run,
hide, and hope for the best.
But that’s only the beginning.
The game also has a sanity meter
which is increased by staying in
the shadows or by looking at the monsters.
So to stay sane you’ll need to make
yourself visible and vulnerable,
and to merely glimpse at the
game’s grotesque creatures.
Through these design decisions, Frictional
made a horror game that was truly terrifying.
It basically created a whole new style of horror
game which inspired both indie games and AAA.
Amnesia is available on Steam, and on
consoles as part of the Amnesia Collection.
Also check out Frictional’s
later games, such as SOMA.
If you want an example of a
game with good side-quests,
look no further than Fallout: New Vegas.
This post-apocalyptic RPG is littered
with side stories that are funny,
weird, spooky, and involving.
And almost all of them are staggeringly
complex in the ways you can solve them.
You’ll get choices, which will affect your
karma and your standing with different groups.
You’ll be able to skip
sections with a skill check.
Maybe the quest will change depending
on which companions you have with you.
And sometimes you can use your initiative to find
another, more interesting way to get through.
Each of these quests is a little
masterclass in RPG design.
In fact, The Witcher 3’s lead quest
designer counts New Vegas as a big
influence on that game’s…
also very good side quests.
Fallout: New Vegas is available
on Steam and the Xbox store.
Civilization V starts with you establishing
the first village on a prehistoric landscape.
And then it follows your journey over two
thousand years as you expand your kingdom,
hoover up resources, discover new technologies,
do battle with your neighbours,
and jet off into outer-space.
It is, indeed, a big game.
And so it seems like it would be
overwhelmingly difficult to understand.
But Civilization, as a franchise,
is surprisingly… approachable.
And that’s for a few reasons.
One is what the original designers
Sid Meier and Bruce Shelley call
the ‘inverted pyramid of decision making’.
Basically: at the start you only have one choice
to make: where to establish your first city.
Soon you’ll have two choices: what to produce
in your city, and where to send your first unit.
Your web of responsibilities then
grows and grows to the point where
you’re making dozens of choices per turn.
But by that point you’re invested,
and understand all the rules.
You also can’t discount the theme - which
is, like, high school-level world history.
It’s easier to grok a game about Egyptians,
bananas, and warplanes than a game about
Protoss, Vespene gas, and photon cannons.
Civilization will teach you to never underestimate
the power of using stuff that the
player likely already knows about.
I picked Civilization V as it’s perhaps the
most straightforward of the games so far,
but all six entries are superb.
How could this list possibly exist without Dark
Souls? It rewrote so many rules for how game
design is supposed to work, and is arguably
the most name-checked game in all of design.
Only one title is absolutely synonymous with
the concept of "this game is hard", after all.
But if I had to focus on just
one single aspect for this list,
then I'd point at the way
the game deals with death.
When you die, you also drop all of the
souls you were carrying at the time.
And because these things act as an ultra
powerful currency - used to power up your
character and to buy new stuff from
shops - it's vitally important that
you make your way back to your dead
body and pick your stash back up.
But if you die on route...
the souls are gone for good.
This simple concept hangs
over your head at all times.
When you've been exploring for ages and have
a massive stack of souls in your pocket,
you become desperate to find a bonfire.
And when you're heading back to your
stash with 20,000 souls on the line,
every step feels dangerous.
Dark Souls didn't invent the
concept of corpse-running,
but it definitely popularised it - and it
now shows up in dozens of different games.
For good or ill.
Dark Souls is available on all major
platforms, as a Remastered version.
Minecraft can be fun when you
treat it like a digital Lego set.
No enemies, no health bar, no hunger meter.
And infinite access to all the blocks.
Just build stuff - whether
that’s the USS Enterprise,
or a rollercoaster, or a working computer.
Whatever takes your fancy.
But it’s also fun when you
treat it like a survival game.
A harrowing fight against the elements
where you have to scavenge for every block,
and slowly build a base that will keep
you safe from a litany of enemy mobs.
And it’s fun, still, when played with
others - whether you’re building together,
working together, or playing
in a more competitive fashion.
Minecraft’s greatest strength is that
the game is whatever you make of it.
The game does not impose rules or structure
- it leaves it up to the player to decide.
That has made it an evergreen title, and proof
that many players love an opportunity
to set their own goals and be creative.
Minecraft is available on every platform
under the sun - though the PC version
is particularly interesting as
you can install past versions.
Check out Minecraft 1.0 to see how things begun.
Spacechem, by Zachtronics, is a great
example of a "problem solving" game.
Unlike puzzle games, which are about
finding a single, specific solution,
problem solving games are about
making up your own damn answer.
Anything that works.
So the game tasks you with building automated
factories that can turn atoms into molecules.
And as long as your build
meets the brief, you’ll pass.
This makes your solution feel deeply personal.
Designer Zach Barth notes
that "people have a really
strong sense of ownership" over their creations.
The set-up also encourages replayablity
in a way that most puzzle games don’t.
You’ll see how your machine scores when compared
to other players, under three different criteria.
Seeing your solution come in well
below the average can be more than
enough motivation to go back and
in and improve your creation.
To make it faster, leaner, cheaper.
Spacechem is on Steam - but
check out Zach’s other games
too - like the 3D Infinifactory
and the hex-based Opus Magnum.
Look, Skyrim is not the best western RPG.
You’ll get better quests, better
stories, better character customisation,
better everything by playing The
Witcher 3 or Baldur’s Gate 3.
But Skyrim is still the
quintessential role-playing game.
A massive fantasy world that you
can explore in any way you want.
You can go where you please, following
points of interest or curiosity.
You can play how you want -
perhaps focusing on magic spells,
hand-to-hand combat, or firing
sneaky arrows from the shadows.
And the story of your adventure is entirely
yours - driven by the places you go,
the characters you meet,
and the quests you tackle.
All modern RPGs - from Elden Ring to Cyberpunk
2077 - can be referred back to Skyrim,
making it an essential touchstone
for any student of game design.
It’s also available on every device under the sun,
as Bethesda will seemingly
never stop porting this thing.
Journey reimagines the concept of what it
means to play with others over the internet.
Most so-called social games are either nakedly
transactional or violent zero-sum competitions.
Journey is different.
So the game features an anonymous
robed figure who is wandering a desert,
before climbing an impossibly tall mountain.
As you progress you may come across another hooded
figure - who is controlled by another player.
And you can choose to travel
alongside them for a while.
But you can’t speak to each
other over text or a headset.
You can’t see each other’s name.
You can’t compete with,
frustrate, or kill each other.
And the only way to actually
communicate is with a single
button that makes you call out a musical note.
In fact, some players might not even
realise that they were working alongside
a real human until the very end, when
your partner’s name is finally revealed.
But still - the connection you make with this
other character is surprisingly deep and close.
This non-traditional approach to cooperation
leads to a very memorable experience,
and proves there are more ways to play
together than simply killing each other.
Journey is a beautiful game that
should be experienced first hand.
It’s on Steam and PlayStation consoles.
When designer Nels Anderson made Mark of the
Ninja, he wanted to make a side scrolling
take on a favourite stealth game:
Thief, which I talked about earlier.
But he made one change to the way Thief works
- which makes Mark of the Ninja actually feel
like a completely different game, and
can teach us a lot about game design.
The change comes in the form of information.
Where Thief gives you very little
feedback on the state of the world,
Mark of the Ninja is drenched in it.
UI elements will tell you if you’re
in light, or hidden in shadows.
It shows you exactly how far
a sound is reverberating.
It shows you what guards can see, what they’re
thinking, and what decisions they’re making.
And it even shows you what items
will do, before you use them.
So where Thief was a game about patient
observation and immersing yourself in
a world, Mark of the Ninja’s information overload
turns this into a game about
creating plans and strategies.
You can use your info advantage to
sneak past guards, to distract them,
to lure them into traps, and so on.
By showing the player exactly how the world
works, the player feels powerful and capable.
It’s an effective lesson on how your
interaction with a world changes,
depending on how much you know about it.
Mark of the Ninja is available on Steam, and
all the consoles as a Remastered edition.
Developer Telltale Games started life by
making point and click adventure games
that harkened back to ‘90s classics
like Monkey Island and Sam and Max.
Games with goofy puzzles and esoteric solutions.
But the studio really hit it big when it put away
the puzzles and focused squarely on
storytelling and character growth.
So The Walking Dead has very few
moments where you’re using a monkey
as a monkey wrench or gluing
cat hair to your upper lip.
Instead, the game is about making difficult
moral decisions in the face of
a terrifying zombie apocalypse.
Playing as Lee Everett, you’re
routinely dropped into tricky
situations where you’ll need to
carefully decide what to do next.
Who should get food when supplies are low? Who
should come with you on a mission, and who should
stay behind? And in moments of true peril - who
should you save, and who should you leave to die?
At its best, The Walking Dead creates some truly
powerful moments that tug on your heartstrings
and make you feel guilt and regret in the
way that only an interactive story can.
And it rarely lets you sit and think on your
choices - dialogue boxes have a decaying
timer above them, and some actions must be
triggered on the spot durning cutscenes.
And then, as the episodes go on,
you’ll see your decisions fan out
and carry over to later chapters.
Small decisions are referenced, but big
decisions can have dramatic ripples on the story.
The Walking Dead kicked off a
whole new era of games at Telltale,
but also influenced other
games like Life is Strange.
The first season is available
on all four platforms.
Virtue’s Last Reward is another
game with difficult decisions,
branching paths, and multiple endings.
But this time the assumption is not that you will
play through the game once (and maybe
look up the other endings on YouTube).
That’s because when you finish the narrative,
you’ll be given access to a massive
flowchart showing you how the story
rippled out from one decision to another,
and finally to one of the game’s endings.
And with this you can now jump
around - inserting yourself back
into the narrative at different points
and then making different choices.
With this time-travelling, multiverse-hopping
super power, you can unlock even more
endings - perhaps learning a password in
one timeline, and then using it in another.
Or finding out a secret about a
character and using it to gain
their trust in a completely different universe.
Virtue’s Last Reward takes a staple
of interactive storytelling and turns
it into a game of its own, making it an
essential touchstone for branching paths.
Virtue’s Last Reward is available on Steam, Xbox,
and PlayStation as part of The Nonary Games,
which also includes the previous title, 999.
If there’s one feature that XCOM: Enemy Unknown
designer Jake Solomon regrets, it’s hit chances.
So, XCOM is a tightly designed tactical
game, where you do battle with alien nasties.
You’ll tell your squad members where to go,
where to take cover, which weapons to
use, and which aliens to take a shot at.
But whether or not that shot
lands… is down to lady luck.
Before you take action, the game
gives you a percentage chance
for your shot landing - a number
driven by sight-lines and distance.
An alien ten metres away will perhaps
have a 80% chance of taking damage.
It’s also worth mentioning that these
numbers are, effectively, made up.
Humans are bad at understanding odds so that 80%
chance on screen is actually
closer to 90 in the code.
But after that, what happens next is down to luck.
And while it can lead to some great moments,
it’s more likely to lead to disappointment.
It’s such a hit in the gut for your
strategy to go completely wrong,
simply because of a lousy die roll.
That’s why Solomon removed them in his
next non-XCOM game, Marvel’s Midnight Sons.
Now - don’t get me wrong.
XCOM is an awesome game with loads of
other great design lessons to teach.
But at the same time, when someone needs
an example of output randomness - i.e.,
luck is applied after you take an
action - XCOM is the go-to game.
It’s available on Steam and the Xbox store.
Spec Ops: The Line is always my go-to
game when talking about invisible choices.
Basically: when games give players a
choice, this is usually done with a
big pop-up box asking the player
which option they want to pick.
A or B? The heroic one or the
evil one? This guy or that guy?
And that’s fine - but Spec Ops
shows another way to do it.
The game will regularly put you into
difficult decision-making moments,
but then ask you to make your choice
by using the basic actions of the game.
In this case: aim and shoot.
So, for instance, in this moment you are asked
to shoot at one of these two strung-up men.
This opens up opportunities to let the player
make choices beyond A and B -
maybe you don’t shoot either.
Maybe you shoot at the snipers in the distance.
Maybe you shoot both, you psychopath.
The game is packed with these things,
which feels more immersive and organic
than picking between two coloured buttons.
Sadly, Spec Ops: The Line has
been pulled from all storefronts,
so you’ll have to dig out a physical
copy of the game to play it today.
With the proliferation of the internet, local
multiplayer games took a bit of a backseat.
But every now and again, a game
would remind us how much fun it
could be to play together in the same space.
Take, for instance, Spaceteam - which is
described as a ‘cooperative shouting game’.
Basically, each player has a
spaceship control panel with a
unique set of controls, dials, knobs, and levers.
And each player will be given commands that
must be followed to keep the spaceship working.
As the commands are often for another player’s
control panel, you’ll need to bark instructions
at each other, and simultaneously listen out for
instructions that pertain to your control panel.
Which leads to a game of, well, a lot of shouting.
It’s a blast to play and a great
example of what can be gained by
making experiences designed for local play.
SpaceTeam is sadly long gone from the iOS App
Store, but it’s still available on Android.
There’s a lot to love about Dishonored - from its
pitch-perfect stealth mechanics
to its world-class level design.
But the thing I want to focus on is the way
the game world reacts to the way you play.
Throughout Dishonored you’re able to
choose what sort of assassin you are:
a sneaky ghost who is never seen, or a chaotic
angel of death who rips every guard in half.
And that extends to all of your targets: there’s
always a non-lethal approach, if you so choose.
Whatever you decide, Dishonored
never explicitly judges your actions.
You’re not classed as ‘good’ or ‘evil’, and you
don’t grow devil horns or suddenly sprout a halo.
Instead, those decisions subtly
ripple out into the world.
The level of chaos you cause
is reflected in the state of
the city - with the streets taken over by
hordes of rats at the highest chaos levels.
The NPCs are also affected and you
might find that certain characters
are unwilling to help - or may actually turn
against you - if you cause too much chaos.
It’s an interesting take on a karma system,
and makes players consider their actions
but without it feeling overly game-y.
Dishonored is on Steam and on Xbox consoles.
Sometimes the best way to learn about game design
is to play a title that seeks to poke fun at it.
The Stanley Parable is a satirical
game about narrative and game-design
conventions - specifically player choice.
And so through an unreliable narrator,
fourth-wall breaking moments,
and lots of jokes made at your expense,
it will make you laugh - and then make
you think about how games get you to make
certain decisions, and feel certain ways.
Ultimately, creator Davey Wreden just wanted
to bamboozle you, saying his intent was to
"mess with the player's head in every
way possible, throwing them off-guard,
or pretending there's an answer and then
kinda whisking it away from in front of them".
He also hoped that the game would
spark discussion and debate afterwards.
It certainly did, considering the fact
that we’re still talking about it today.
The game is on Steam, and on other platforms
as part of the Ultra Deluxe Edition.
Also check out Wreden’s follow-up, The Beginner’s
Guide, for more fourth-wall breaking shenanigans.
It’s almost impossible to explain Brothers: A
Tale of Two Sons without spoiling its best moment.
But I’ll try.
The game follows two brothers
on a journey to uncover some
magical water that will save their dying father.
But you don’t control just one brother,
or swap between them - you actually
control both, simultaneously, with
one analogue stick and half the shoulder
buttons dedicated to each of the boys.
This kicks off a journey where you’ll
have to be in two places at once.
You’ll be solving puzzles that you’d
usually see in a co-op game - you know:
one character distracts an enemy while the other
slips past - but now you’re doing it by yourself.
Over the course of this imaginative
fairy-tale journey, Brothers so firmly
establishes the two boys as existing in your
left and right thumbs that the most impactful
storytelling happens not on screen -
but actually on the controller itself.
It’s a remarkable piece of interactive
storytelling that should be
required reading for anyone wishing
to tell a narrative through gameplay.
Brothers is available on Steam and consoles, but
I’d avoid the unattractive remake if I were you.
In 2010, game research Ian Bogost made a parody
game - designed to poke fun
at mindless Facebook apps.
So Cow Clicker was FarmVille - but
boiled down to its absolute essentials.
The player has a pasture containing
a single cow which you can click,
once every six hours, to make a number go up.
It was supposed to be a one-note joke to
show how Zynga could get players addicted
with the most stupidly simple gameplay… and
then players became addicted to Cow Clicker.
It was a Facebook megahit
with thousands of players,
and Bogost even started updating the
game with more cows, and more mechanics.
It proved that for some players… clicking on a
thing to make a number go up was a good time.
The logical conclusion of Cow
Clicker was Cookie Clicker.
Again, you’re clicking on an
image to make numbers go up.
But now there are upgrades and unlocks that can
make you click faster, or do the clicking for you.
This so called idle or incremental
game is kind of… nothing.
But it’s also weirdly compelling.
Even I will admit to having sunk a few
hours into increasing my cookie empire.
What you take from Cookie Clicker is
up to you - but I’d argue that as the
ultimate distillation of how players can
get obsessed with upgrades, progression,
rewards, and optimisation, it’s
an essential game to know about.
You can play it in your
browser or get it on Steam.
Gone Home is still, in my
mind, the quintessential - uh,
walking simulator? I guess
that genre name has stuck.
So in this game you play as a young woman who has
returned to her family home, to
find the whole place abandoned.
So to figure out what’s happened in your
absence you’ll need to root through your
family’s possessions and piece together the story.
It is, then, a game about reading
notes, receipts, birthday cards,
shampoo bottles, and poorly produced zines.
Which, might sound a little
dull on the surface - but it
actually makes for a tremendously compelling game.
And that’s simply because the real
gameplay is happening in your head.
With each note you find, you’re mentally filling
in blanks, making assumptions and connections,
and fleshing out what you
know about these characters.
And because it’s a game, you naturally find these
objects in a somewhat random order
- or maybe miss objects entirely.
This makes your understanding
of the narrative feel personal
and hard won - putting you in the
role of an amateur archeologist.
Games have long featured environmental
storytelling - which is when a narrative is
baked into the level design itself - but Gone Home
proved that this alone could make
for a fascinating game experience.
Gone Home is available on all major platforms.
Papers, Please proves that video games are perhaps
the best medium for putting
you in another person’s shoes.
The games casts you as a border agent of a
fictional soviet country, and you have to
check each entrant’s documents before deciding
whether to let them in, or turn them away,
At the start it’s a fun game of
spot the difference and deduction.
You have to look for discrepancies in
their documents, or spot ways that their
application is breaking some rule or regulation.
But then you’ll meet characters
who stop you in your tracks.
Perhaps someone who desperately needs
to get in - a woman fleeing persecution,
say - but their passport is out of
date or their paperwork is incomplete.
Do you let them in, and live with
the risk and the penalty? Or do
you follow the rules and damn them to their fate?
In this precise moment, Papers, Please makes the
case for games as a powerful artistic medium.
Capable of not just showing you why people
make certain decisions, but by putting you
right there in that situation and asking…
what would you do? The game is on Steam
SteamWorld Dig operates on a gameplay
loop that can be… hazardously addictive.
Here’s how it works.
As tinpot robot Rusty, you’re trying to
dig through a gigantic mine
that hides beneath your town.
But the only problem is: you’re
not the most adept miner.
At the beginning of the game you only
have a small health bar, a crappy pickaxe,
a tiny lantern, and enough inventory
space to hold about 3 lumps of gold.
So, soon enough, you’re back at the surface.
You sell your plundered gold for cash
and then head to the upgrade shop
where you can buy better equipment.
A stronger pickaxe, say, or a better lantern.
And then it’s back into the mine,
so you can dig a little deeper.
Stick around for a little longer.
And find a little more gold for the
next time you’re back on the surface.
This repeats, over and over again,
keeping you stuck in a trance as you
just want to go a little bit deeper.
In the wrong hands, this can be
a hollow gameplay loop that only
serves to artificially pad out a game’s length.
But, luckily, SteamWorld Dig
also has varied gameplay,
an interesting storyline,
and enticing secrets to find.
Whatever the case - you’ll see
this loop in all sorts of games,
making it an essential design concept to learn.
SteamWorld Dig is available
on all major platforms.
Making believable AI characters is
difficult - so how about you focus
your efforts on making just
one, really good AI opponent?
That’s the idea behind Alien:
Isolation - a truly terrifying
horror game that puts you up against
one of the most famous movie monsters.
As you explore the space station -
solving problems, dealing with androids,
and navigating to new areas - you’ll
be stalked by an unstoppable Xenomorph.
The monster is driven by a number of complex
systems - allowing the alien to see and hear
the player, to sneak up behind you,
and to respond realistically to fire.
Most importantly, the Alien’s movements
are rarely predetermined by the designers.
As designer Gary Napper explains,
"we needed something that would be
different every time you played it.
You're going to die a lot,
which means restarting a lot,
and if the alien was scripted,
you'd see the same behaviour.
That makes the alien become
predictable, and a lot less scary."
Another clever trick is that the
alien will be given access to new
abilities and strategies as the
game goes along - which creates
the illusion that the alien is learning
from its interactions with the player.
Alien: Isolation is an important touchstone
for terrifying AI-driven characters.
And it’s available on all major platforms.
Mario Kart is always the go-to example
when it comes to talking about balancing
a game around players of different skill levels.
And it comes down to the way
the game doles out items.
When you race through one of these item
boxes, the result is far from random.
Instead, the power-up you get is entirely
determined by your position in the race.
If you’re up front - i.e., you’re doing well - the
game will give you relatively weak
items like green shells and coins.
But if you’re towards the back of the
pack - i.e., you’re struggling - the game
will grant you super powerful weapons like the
superstar, the bullet bill, or the blue shell:
a missile whose sole mission is to
seek out the person in first place.
This creates a negative feedback
loop - a self-balancing system
where struggling players are given a helping hand,
and where expert racers are held back -
giving everyone a chance to have fun together.
Such systems can be found
in all sorts of multiplayer
games - especially social and party games.
But you only need to namecheck the blue shell for
any game designer to know
what you’re talking about.
Mario Kart 8 is on Wii U - but feel free to check
out the expanded Mario Kart 8 Deluxe on Switch.
Adventure games started with text.
Games like Colossal Cave Adventure and
Zork described the game world with words,
and invited you to interact with a text parser.
Eventually, technology allowed for graphics
and mouse input - leading to
point and click adventures.
But the text adventure… it never went away.
It morphed into interactive fiction
and has been quietly ticking along
in the background ever since, through
games like Photopia, Depression Quest,
and, my pick of the bunch, 80 Days - a
beautiful reimagining of Jules Verne’s
novel where you make your way around the
world by various methods of transport.
More than anything, this game really shows the
power of using text as your primary technology.
Because here’s the truth: text is cheap.
It takes just a single paragraph to
introduce a player to an entire city
or a new character - things that, in other
games, would require 3D models, textures,
artificial intelligence, and voice acting.
And so 80 Days is a big game.
Inkle’s co-founder Jon Ingold says
"on one complete play through,
you see perhaps 3% of the
text that’s in the game".
And so you’re encouraged to
play the whole thing again,
this time taking different routes
and making different decisions.
Some of the games on this list feature branching
paths and choices that ripple out into the
narrative - but they pale in comparison
to what Inkle can achieve through text.
80 Days is available on Steam and Switch.
Her Story, by Sam Barlow, is a perfect example
of what some call the ‘information game’.
The game sits you down in front of a database,
containing interviews with a woman who’s
giving testimony about her husband’s murder.
And the entire story - who
killed him, why they did it,
and everything that led to it -
is right there on the database.
But… you can’t just watch the
story in chronological order.
Instead, the tapes are cut up into almost
300 short clips and stored on a clunky PC
interface that asks you to type in words to
unearth the clips that feature those words.
This strange, and slightly contrived system
means you have to uncover the plot for yourself.
To find new clips you’ll need to pay
close attention to Hannah’s testimony
and think up words that will help
you search through this massive web.
And the clips you do find are rarely in order,
so you’ll need to piece together
the narrative from disparate clues.
It turns you into something halfway
between a detective and an archeologist.
You’re following leads and doing
deductive reasoning - but also
piecing together the past using
an incomplete set of facts.
It’s a wonderful experience, and a
striking example of how withholding
information from the player can
lead to compelling gameplay.
Her Story is on Steam, Xbox, and mobile.
To help me pick the perfect games for this list,
I totted up all the games I’ve ever shown on Game
Maker’s Toolkit, and ordered them by frequency.
And of the more than 1000 games
I’ve discussed on this channel,
there’s one game that’s appeared more than any
other: Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain.
Why? Well, it’s just a great
example of so many design concepts.
For instance, it’s a great showing of
systemic design, as each enemy camp
is filled with complex AI agents that
can be tricked, lured out, and trapped.
The Fulton extraction system is all
about letting the player decide how
to play this stealth game: by killing
soldiers, or turning them into allies.
The scoring system allows you to play
the levels in whatever way you like,
but rewards players who are quick and stealthy.
The game makes failure fun, by switching the
game from a slow and sneaky stealth game… into
a manic action movie full of explosions
and last-minute helicopter extractions.
And the AI tries to learn from your actions -
perhaps giving the guards helmets if you keep
doing headshots or bringing in floodlights
if you always tackle bases at night.
This puts a stop to you doing the same optimum
strategies and forces you to mix up your approach.
Oh, and also this shot of Snake with
a prosthetic arm is a great visual to
use whenever I mention accessibility,
which probably puffed up the numbers.
But whatever the case, MGS V is full of
great little design lessons and ideas,
making it a must-play for anyone -
not just those making stealth games.
The Phantom Pain is on PC, Xbox, and PlayStation.
We sometimes ignore the fact that, in most
games, we’re playing as a mass murderer.
The story might say we’re a good guy - but just
consider the body count of
an average shooter or RPG.
You’re basically committing
genocide every time you play.
Undertale puts this fact into sharp relief.
This is a short and quirky RPG where you
can choose how to deal with
every enemy you come across.
You can either defeat them, like normal.
Or you can find a way to spare the monster -
perhaps by talking to them, flattering them,
listening to their dialogue, or just holding
out long enough for them to get bored and leave.
With this in mind, you can play through the game
in different ways - perhaps trying to
spare every enemy and boss character,
or simply going on a psychopathic genocide run
where you mow down every monster in your way.
The game reacts to your choices -
giving different plot points and
ending scenes depending on how you choose to play.
But things get even more interesting
on a second playthrough, as the game
comments on your earlier decisions, and your
choice to come back and try something new.
Should it be possible to undo your
destruction, just by starting a new save file?
Undertale is worth playing simply for being
an RPG that doesn’t take 30 hours to finish.
But it’s also an important reference point
for how games handle morality and murder.
It’s available on all major platforms.
Downwell is always my go-to example when
talking about "dual purpose design",
or the idea that one mechanic
can have more than one function.
So, the jump button doubles up as your
shoot button when used in mid-air.
Shooting kills enemies, breaks
blocks, and slows your descent.
Killing enemies reloads your gun
boots and can add to your combo.
And landing on the ground clears
your combo and resets your ammo.
Because everything in the game
is doing two or more jobs,
we get a game with a lot of depth
for half the number of mechanics.
Downwell is also a great
example of risk and reward.
The best way to play is to jump on enemies,
rather than shooting them - that
will net you the biggest rewards.
But this is decidedly more risky so it’s
only intended for more seasoned players.
With this, Downwell has a natural
difficulty curve where new players
will shoot enemies and just try
to survive, while expert players
will eventually decide to graduate to
bopping enemies and playing for score.
Downwell is on all major platforms.
Video games have a unique opportunity to
transport us to new and interesting locations.
To let us play as virtual
tourists and interlopers.
And few games do that better than Yakuza 0.
This game - and to be honest, all of the games in
the Yakuza series - take place in a
beautifully realised Tokyo district.
And while Kamurocho doesn’t really exist… it’s
extremely close to its real life counterpart,
Kaboo.. key... cho...
Kaboocheeko...
I should have... I should have prepared that
better before I got in the recording booth.
Yakuza achieves this through extremely
detailed recreations of Japanese shops,
vending machines, and buildings.
By letting you buy familiar foodstuff
from convenience stores and restaurants.
And by giving you all sorts of side activities
that make you feel like a local - whether
that’s darts, karaoke, a hostess bar,
or an arcade filled with Sega machines.
The idea of "the city is almost another
character!" is trotted out a lot,
but it’s very true of the Yakuza games.
And it only gets better the more of them you play.
It might be cheeky to reuse the same city
block across almost 20 years of games but
it’s always a joy to return to Kamurocho - to
see how it changes and how it stays the same.
Oh, and also you can smash a bicycle
over people’s heads and stuff.
It’s great.
Yakuza 0 is available on
Steam, PlayStation, and Xbox.
Minecraft proved that some
players love to build stuff.
Kerbal Space Program shows what fun can be
had when you throw physics into the mix.
This game is all about building rockets,
with the hope of launching them into
space - without everything blowing up
or spinning around like a mad pinwheel.
There are plenty of games about creating
detailed, simulated mechanisms - but
few with such a clear and obvious goal as
"get this thing to this very high point".
And fewer still that are as funny as Kerbal.
Because physics are a tricky
thing to wrangle in games.
Designers typically want to have a lot
of control over how their games work,
and physics are - by their nature
- unpredictable and fickle.
But physics are almost always
funny and so while Kerbal is
definitely serious and grounded
and praised by NASA technicians
for its realism - its also just endlessly
hilarious to see your incredible creation,
which took hours to painstakingly build,
immediately fall apart and blow up.
Kerbal Space Program is available
on Steam, PlayStation, and Xbox.
While playing games will certainly
teach you a lot about game design,
you'll learn even more by jumping
in and making games for yourself.
However, I know full well that starting
from scratch can be quite intimidating,
so perhaps it's best to start by playing
around in someone else's playground.
Super Mario Maker lets you do just that.
This lets you make your own levels using
the tools, rules and visuals of the Super
Mario platformers, and so you can see for yourself
what it's like to construct a level from scratch.
You'll soon realise that it's not easy to
make something that's actually fun to play,
and so as you improve your skills, try other
people's levels and hunt down hints and tips,
you'll soon realise that you're making
your first stab at level design.
Sadly, Mario Maker's Wii U
servers are now shut down,
so it's impossible to share your user-made levels.
So feel free to go straight to the
sequel on Switch if you prefer.
Whenever I need an example of a game where every
design decision points in the same direction.
Where every choice was made to
elevate the central fantasy.
I go for Doom - the 2016 follow-up
to that pioneering FPS of the 1990s.
This game wants you to feel like
a brutal demon-slaying badass,
and does this with every fibre of its being: from
the movement speed, to the weapon designs, to way
the protagonist ends Zoom calls in the way we’d
all like to: by smashing the computer to bits.
But my absolute favourite idea is the glory kill.
Basically: Doom is not a game
with regenerating health bars.
You do not lick your wounds by cowering
behind a box or a knee-high wall.
Instead, the best way to get health is to shoot
demons until they are staggered - and then run
up close and trigger a gory execution animation
- a move which showers you with health pick-ups.
It’s a move thats guaranteed to make
you feel like a ruthless predator.
You have to run directly towards enemies,
in a genre that typically favours retreat.
And because it’s tied to
such an essential resource,
id Software makes you do it
again and again and again.
And it feels amazing every time.
Doom is all on major platforms.
Okay, so in Factorio, you’ve crash
landed on this barren alien planet.
And you’ve got one goal in
mind: build a new spaceship.
But mining all the resources by hand,
and forging all the components one by
one… that’s going to be a lot of work.
So this is where Factorio’s gift to
gaming comes in: the joy of automation.
The ultimate goal is to build a
self-sustaining factory that can
harvest, smelt, and forge new suff all by itself.
To create a planet-wide network of production
chains, all linked up by trains and drones.
It’s a bit like Spacechem, but bigger,
more open ended, and even more maddening.
You can lose hundreds of hours to this game as you
fall into a rabbit hole of problem
solving and productivity growth.
I mean, if I completely redesign my entire factory
I’ll get two more copper plates per minute.
Worth it, right?
The game is on Steam and Nintendo Switch.
Persona 5 is very much a game of two halves.
On the one hand, it’s a life simulator
about a bunch of kids at high school.
You’ll go to class, hang out in the cafeteria,
do after-school jobs and chores, go to the
movie theatre, buy clothes, and go on dates.
But on the other hand, it’s a dungeon-crawling
RPG where you waltz through palaces,
do battle with demons, collect
monster allies, and loot treasure.
Then it’s back to school again.
Having the player jump between
genres can be great for pacing.
As soon as you’re getting
bored of endless RPG battles,
the game sends you back to the real world
for conversations and character growth.
And when that starts to drag,
it’s back to the action.
But this can be troublesome: if the
player only likes one aspect of the game,
or spends too long on one half of the experience,
jumping back to the other style of
gameplay can feel jarring or frustrating.
But that’s rarely the case in
Persona - and that's because
everything revolves around a
singular core of friendship.
Joker’s pals are his friends in the social
simulator and his party members in the RPG,
and so no matter what you’re doing, those
friendships are being explored and evolved.
Persona 5 Royal is available on all platforms.
Hitman is a game about mastery and repetition.
The game puts you in the shoes of Agent 47
- who is tasked with visiting some exotic
locale and assassinating some very naughty person.
Now, Agent 47 is depicted as the
ultimate assassin - a person so
perfect, that he makes murder seem effortless.
But, despite this, you’re actually not expected
to do very well on your first
attempt at one of these missions.
Things will inevitably go wrong.
You’ll be spotted trespassing by a guard,
you’ll leave evidence behind, or perhaps
you’ll have to kill an innocent civilian
before they have a chance to raise the alarm.
You first go will likely see you reach
the goal in the most messy way imaginable.
But that’s okay: because you can go again.
Hitman’s levels operate on a predictable
clockwork choreography - events repeat
at the exact same time, targets
walk on the same looping routes,
and objects show up in the same
locations over and over again.
So you can use your ever-expanding
knowledge of the level to do better.
With each repetition, you move closer and closer
to becoming Agent 47 - to the point you can
assassinate your target without ever being
spotted, or even changing out of your suit.
Where many games expect you
to blow through content once,
and never see it again, Hitman proves the
value of letting a player soak a level in.
‘Repetitive’ isn’t necessarily a dirty word
if it leads to a feeling of truly mastery.
Hitman is available everywhere except Switch,
as part of the World of Assassination trilogy.
Overcooked is a game that can end
friendships and relationships,
just as quickly as it can make them.
The game puts you and up to three friends
in charge of a bustling restaurant kitchen
and you must work together to create the
meals that are requested by customers.
This is done through things
like getting ingredients,
chopping them, cooking them in an oven,
and delivering them to front of house.
And so it seems sensible for each
player to take on a single role,
focus on their task, and quietly
repeat until the level is done.
But that’s not what happens - and
it’s usually because of dirty plates.
No one wants to be the plate washer.
And, anyway, they come in at such
an odd frequency that it would be
a waste for someone to focus entirely on that.
And so as soon as you run out of
plates your perfect plan falls apart.
You shout at each other, you switch
jobs, you get in each other’s way,
and if you’re not careful you’ll fail the task.
So Overcooked is a cooperative game
that forces you to actually cooperate.
To communicate, plan things out together, and to
give each other a heads up when things change.
It’s manic, loud, and lots of fun.
And a great example of how to do co-op right.
Overcooked! is available everywhere.
Furi is the game that made
me better at Dark Souls.
Maybe a strange claim about a
game where you dodge in and out
of waves of neon-coloured bullets… but it’s true.
That’s because this boss rush adventure
teaches you to focus on defending against
incoming attacks, as you patiently wait for
an opening in your opponent’s attack pattern.
Then, when they’re vulnerable, you can rush in and
do a little damage… before noping
out and waiting for another turn.
Furi simply will not let you play this
game like a button mashing maniac - which,
I admit, I have been guilty of in the past.
You can’t win by simply hitting the
sword button as quickly as possible.
That will just leave you
bruised, beaten, and fed up.
So through its simple, but
elegantly designed combat system,
Furi will teach you patience and observation.
Each boss battle is like a long, slow,
painful lesson in how to be better at
fighting this one exact dude, and you
won’t move on until you get an A grade.
Furi is available on all major platforms.
The Zelda franchise changed
a lot after the first game.
While the NES original allowed
for freeform exploration of a
large world map, later Zelda games
were more linear and restrictive.
Dungeons had to be done in a specific order,
and the games were structured
around hitting specific story beats.
But with Breath of the Wild, Zelda finally went
back to a game where player freedom is king.
After a brief tutorial section,
the game drops you into a post-apocalyptic
Hyrule and lets you go off and explore.
Characters can give you quests and guidance,
but you can also ignore that stuff entirely and
wander off in a completely different direction.
To make this whole thing work, the
game has a very simple structure.
The final boss - Calamity Ganon - can be
approached at any time after the tutorial.
But you’ll almost certainly fail.
His castle is locked up tight, filled with
environmental hazards and high-level enemies.
So you explore elsewhere - finding new
items, weapons, powers, and skills.
Each dungeon you finish
will weaken the final boss.
And each quest-line you complete will potentially
give you an item that will help
you assault Ganon’s fortress.
This turns the whole game into a player-directed
quest to prepare for the final showdown.
A Rocky-esque training montage where everything
you do is for that ultimate
goal of vanquishing Ganon.
And this allows for a game about
adventure, exploration, mystery,
and surprise - in a way we haven’t really
seen since the very first Zelda game.
Breath of the Wild is
available on the Switch eShop.
Fortnite is a cheeky game.
It was supposed to be about building
fortifications to protect your team from zombies.
But when Epic saw PlayerUnknown’s
Battlegrounds - an addictive Battle
Royale showdown between 100 players - they were
like, actually, yeah, let’s do that instead.
Like I say: it’s cheeky.
But this is also Fortnite’s strength.
The developers have always been willing
to rethink key aspects of the game.
Major mechanics have changed.
The infamous building gameplay is now optional.
And with every season, which lasts a few
months, the game introduces radical new
changes like fresh weapons, vehicles,
movement mechanics, and characters.
Plus, the all-important world map has been
destroyed and remade several times over.
Basically: if you don’t play Fortnite for a while,
it’s like trying a whole new
game when you play it next.
Fortnite’s frequent reinvention is probably
not sustainable for most studios - in fact,
it doesn’t sound like it’s sustainable for
Epic - but it’s an incredible example of
how constantly changing content can
keep a game feel fresh and exciting.
Fortnite is available everywhere.
Bennett Foddy has built a
career on pissing off players,
with punishing games built
around absurd control schemes.
Like QWOP - a game where you independently control
an olympic sprinter’s thighs and
calves with four keyboard keys.
His magnum opus, though, is Getting Over It
- a game about a bald bloke in a cauldron who
uses a sledgehammer as a sort of climber’s
pick to ascend an impossibly-high mountain.
You have to use an awkward
set of unconventional mouse
movements to grab, push, and pull your way higher.
And if you fall… you fall.
The mountain is a single, continuous level,
and there no checkpoints or save rooms.
So you can be almost at the summit and then
fall all the way down to the very bottom.
This feels, somehow, even worse than dying in an
old NES game and being sent back to level one.
The game is a loving throwback to those old games.
From a time where failures were punished,
and successes felt truly earned.
After years of games with smooth edges and
ample handholding, the only help you’ll
get in Getting Over It is Bennett Foddy’s
encouragement via a philosophical voice over.
The game’s on Steam. Play it if you dare.
Monolith’s Middle-Earth games remain as some
of the most ambitious entries in
the world of big budget gaming.
Because Shadow of War might look like yet another
open world romp with stealth, skill trees,
and flashy combat - but soon enough, you’ll
realise that there’s more going on under the hood.
Basically: among the cannon fodder
enemies you’ll find orc captains.
Each one has a name, a voice, a set of skills,
and - most importantly - a memory of the player.
So if you run away from battle, they might pop
up half an hour later and call you a coward.
And if you burn them to death,
they might miraculously show up
next play session with a sack on
their head and a score to settle.
This so-called nemesis system creates truly
memorable stories with multiple different orcs.
Maybe there’s the guy who just won’t die,
the dude who always refuses to finish you
off when you fail, or the annoying dude
who can’t stop singing throughout battle.
Crucially, these stories are completely
unique to each player - entirely based
on which orcs are randomly generated,
and how they respond to your gameplay.
This sort of emergent storytelling is
usually the stuff of experimental indie
games - but it’s here, in a triple
A console game with a Hollywood IP.
You don’t see them like this very often.
Shadow of War is on Steam, Xbox, and PlayStation.
Among Us is the perfect example
of a social deduction game.
A game where one or more players
are secretly trying to sabotage
the mission - and the other
players have to weed them out.
So most of the players in an Among Us game
are trying to keep a spaceship running by
doing little mini-games and other such tasks.
But a select few are imposters and are
trying to secretly murder their friends.
At any point, a player can trigger a meeting
and accuse someone of being an imposter.
So Among Us becomes a game
about deceit and deception.
About evidence, collaboration, and voting.
If you all decide to vote someone off of
the spaceship you’ll immediately see if
they were a dastardly imposter…
or a fellow crew-mate. Whoops!
Among Us - and the card games that
inspired it - encourage all sorts
of wild social dynamics that you don’t
normally get to use in the real world.
And because the game is more
about the people you play with,
than the game itself, it’s
almost infinitely enjoyable.
Among Us is available on all platforms.
Celeste is a game about overcoming
anxiety and cutting yourself some slack.
So it’s perhaps no surprise that this challenging
platformer is a poster child
for being kind to the player.
To start, it comes via the controls themselves.
Madeline’s massive movement script
is packed with little tweaks that
are designed to subtly help the player.
For instance - coyote time means that you can
jump, even if you’ve already run off the edge
of a platform, to ensure that players don’t need
pixel perfect precision when inputting commands.
All of these little grace mechanics are there to
permit the player’s intention
- if not their exact inputs.
And it leads to a game that just feels
fluid and responsive - and never punitive.
Though, that certainly doesn’t make for
an easy game - Celeste is a ruthlessly
punishing platformer that takes delight
in counting the number of times you died.
But help is available if you can’t do it.
The game comes with an assist mode that’s
packed with useful accessibility options - and
outright cheat codes - to make the game easier.
Celeste came out at the height of a
debate around whether it was suitable
for intentionally hard games to include
easy modes and accessibility options.
Celeste’s galaxy brain solution:
just tell the player what the game is
about and why these features exist.
Funnily enough: most players get it and don’t need
to turn on assist mode unless they really need it.
Celeste is available on every platform.
Rimworld is a story generator.
I mean, it’s also a survival game about
trying to manage a colony of people.
But the point of the game is
to generate an interesting,
emergent, and often chaotic narrative.
It partly does this through a mishmash of
loads of different systems, which can all
smush up next to each other and create
interesting - and unexpected - effects.
The usual sort of emergent storytelling
we might see in highly systematic games.
But the game also takes a more direct approach,
with an "AI storyteller" that keeps track of
the colony’s current situation, and then picks
events based on what would be most interesting.
This makes for a game full of truly unique and
personal storytelling moments - making it an
essential play for anyone interested in the
way games can generate and curate narratives.
Rimworld is on Steam, PlayStation, and Xbox.
Florence tells the tale of a young
woman and her first true love,
through a montage of tiny mini games.
These range from brushing your teeth to
eating meals to shaking polaroid pictures.
And they’re achieved through
really simple controls,
like taps and tickles of the touchscreen.
But there’s a deeper level here, as developer
Mountain uses your interaction with these
minigames as a metaphor, to express the
feeling of performing these actions.
Like, when Florence’s new
boyfriend Kish reveals his dreams,
you scrape away at the surface with your
finger to reveal the image underneath.
And when Florence pushes
Kish to follow that dream,
you physically push him from one
side of the screen to the other.
The best example, though, has
to be the conversation system,
where speech bubbles are
created from puzzle pieces.
The way you put those words together tells
you everything you need to know about how
well Florence and Kish are communicating.
Lead designer Ken Wong said "For a level to work,
it needs to have an interesting interaction
that evokes a feeling or tells a story.
The feeling or story has to come from
the interactions, not from the images".
Florence is available on
mobile, Steam, and Switch.
It seems perfectly natural that you shouldn’t
know what your enemies are thinking.
And so we’ve had decades of strategy games
built around the idea of preparing for
whatever your opponent might do next.
But what would happen if the enemies
actually telegraphed their exact intentions?
That’s the idea at the heart of Into the
Breach: a tightly-designed tactics game
where you know what your foes will do on
their next turn, and can plan around it.
So not only can you kill an enemy before
they destroy some vital infrastructure,
or dodge out of the way of an incoming attack,
but you can actually push one enemy
into the path of another enemy’s attack.
This turns the game into an elegant puzzle game
where you can figure out the optimum way
to turn your enemies against themselves.
Randomness and information are two things that
game designers have to think about carefully.
And Into the Breach is an excellent
example of what happens when almost
nothing is left up to chance, and almost
everything is shown to the player.
It’s on Steam, consoles, and mobile
if you’ve got a Netflix account.
So Slay the Spire is definitely not
the first game to hit on the idea of
synergies - they’ve been part of games,
and especially card games, for decades.
But few titles have done the idea
with such elegance and success.
The game is a deck-building dungeon battler where
you slowly add more and more cards to your deck.
And it doesn’t take long to realise that certain
cards can work in tandem with each other.
Perhaps one card poisons your enemy, and another
card deals extra damage to a poisoned enemy.
Suddenly, strategies start to emerge.
Ideas, plans, and tactics.
You start to sculpt your deck - buying cards and
passive buffs called relics -
to make this strategy happen.
And when it pays off - when
you’ve built a deck that can
do crazy combinatorial damage numbers to
every enemy you see, it feels amazing.
Like you’ve broken the game
and ripped apart the code.
In other genres, such game-breaking strategies
would be patched out as soon
as the instructions hit Reddit.
But they work fine in a roguelike:
the game is so random that you can
never guarantee that you’ll
find a certain card or relic.
Slay the Spire is available
on all major platforms.
"How much do my choices really
matter?" It’s a question that’s
often asked of games with decisions,
dialogue trees, and branching paths.
Are my choices going to cause huge waves that
irrevocably shift the narrative - or tiny ripples?
It’s a fair question.
But games like Disco Elysium prove that even
small choices can be impactful
and memorable when done right.
In this game - a sprawling, novelistic,
combat-free RPG - all players will end
up following largely the same story.
There are no big branching
paths or multiple endings.
But despite this, the game is
constantly keeping track of what
you do - and then referencing
your choices and decisions.
If you run everywhere, your
partner will comment on that.
If you’re an arsehole to certain
characters, they’ll remember that.
If you walk around in your underwear,
characters will have something to say.
And my favourite part of the game happens near
the end, where some of the main characters
come together to discuss your journey, and
make note of your actions, and decisions.
ZA/UM writer Justin Keenan calls this
micro-reactivity and says when it works,
"it's probably the closest an RPG can come
to replicating the tabletop experience of
having a very good dungeon master
sitting across from you listening
to you and responding to your most
idiosyncratic choices as a player".
Disco Elysium is available on
all platforms as The Final Cut.
A little while back, I described
Her Story as an information game:
a type of game where everything
is available to you - but you
can only decipher it by asking the right
questions and following the correct leads.
Outer Wilds is like that but
instead of a PC database,
it takes place in an entire
simulated solar system.
This time loop adventure asks you to figure
out why the sun will explode after 22 minutes.
And so you’ll need to hop between
planets - like a watery giant and
a pair of sand-swapping hourglass
planets - to figure out the secret.
Again: your progress is not halted
by combat or unlockable abilities,
but simply your understanding of the world.
Each planet hides clues that will help you to
uncover new areas on the other celestial bodies.
By following these leads, and zig-zagging across
the solar system, you’ll slowly uncover the truth.
And hopefully put a stop to that
whole annoying supernova thing.
Designer Alex Beachum says he wanted
to "create a world that constantly
makes references to things players
can actually go out and discover",
which leads to a satisfying
loop of exploring and learning.
Outer Wilds is available on all major platforms.
Here’s a hot take - the most interesting thing
about virtual reality is not the headset.
Seeing a world in 360 degrees is
certainly amazing, but in my opinion,
there’s more excitement to
be found in the controllers.
These things let you reach out into full 3D space,
and they track the exact movement of
your hands - and even your fingers.
So take… any firefight in Half-Life: Alyx.
The set-up is the same as any other shooter - but
the controls lead to emergent gameplay
that I’ve never had in a classic FPS.
Like… being able to crack open a door
a few inches, and poke my gun through,
to blast at head crabs from relative safely.
Or fumbling to reload a gun, and
dropping the bullets all over the floor,
in the middle of a frantic firefight.
Or reflexively grabbing an object and
holding it up to bat away a lunging enemy.
These aren’t game mechanics, in
the traditional sense - these are
just natural outcomes of having a world that
allows for completely freeform interaction.
It sometimes feels like VR is going
to crack open a whole new paradigm
for how we interact with games - and
we’re truly only at the beginning.
Half-Life: Alyx is available on Steam, but
naturally requires some kind of VR headset.
Inscryption is more than just a
good deck-building card battler.
It’s a whole experience - a game where
you think you’ve reached the end,
only to realise that you’ve
merely scratched the surface.
Inscryption - much like the other
games designed by Daniel Mullins - is
a meta-textual horror game that keeps
unfolding in different and surprising ways.
The game mixes genres, art styles,
and storytelling methods and jumps
between the game itself, and a whole
fictional world that surrounds the game.
It’s game within a game, within a game.
And there’s even more to find in the real world as
the deepest lore can only be found in
an ARG experience outside of the game.
If this all sounds maddeningly vague,
it’s because I don’t want to spoil
the game’s greatest delights.
So play Inscryption to learn more
about how games can revel in mystery,
surprise, and keeping the player guessing.
It’s available on all four platforms.
Much earlier in this video -
and hello if you’re still here,
thanks for hanging in there - I talked
about the joys of levelling up in Diablo II.
You kill monsters, unlock more powerful
skills, and then kill more monsters.
It’s a wonderfully addictive loop.
But what if we simplify it? Boil
it down to its purest essence.
Well then we get… Vampire Survivors.
In this game, the character
automatically attacks and so
all you have to do is navigate near
to enemies and wait for them to die.
Killing enemies nets experience points which
can be spent on new, or more powerful attacks.
Some attacks can also power each other up,
creating synergistic combos that do more damage.
And that’s… kinda it.
You just wiggle around and watch enemies die.
And yet, it’s hard to put down.
Like, really hard.
So by taking the most potent bits from
Diablo, Geometry Wars, Cookie Clicker,
and Slay the Spire, we get a game that can
hold players in a powerful, vice-like grip.
Is that good? That’s up to you.
But Vampire Survivors holds lots of
lessons about how to keep players engaged.
The game is available on all four platforms.
Tunic has some of the most
satisfying secrets in all of gaming.
They are oftentimes esoteric and cryptic
- but you’re also subtly pushed into
solving them for yourself, rather than
reading up about them on a subreddit.
Most of the secrets come down to a simple idea:
everything is right in front of your eyes.
The things you need to solve Tunic’s riddles are
right there in the world - but
you just don’t realise it yet.
You don’t understand their meaning,
or how to use or activate them.
It’s only later - usually when you stumble upon
one of the game’s instruction
manual pages - that you get it.
And you get that rush of excitement
and realisation as you now get how
to open that door, reach that treasure
chest, or read that cryptic language.
Mind you: Tunic never forces this onto players.
It’s entirely possible to
ignore all of these secrets,
treat it like a cute action game, and finish the
whole thing without really engaging your brain.
But it’s almost impossible to not
take the bait, follow a thread,
and get wrapped up in the game’s mysteries.
Tunic is available on all platforms.
And so we come to our final game,
which brings us bang up to date - or,
more accurately, into the future as this
game is technically not fully released.
Shadows of Doubt is a detective
simulator that’s still in early access,
but well worth playing to show you what
can be achieved with procedural generation.
Because this game takes place
in a small city block filled
with hundreds of citizens who
are all randomly generated.
They have random jobs, homes, partners,
blood types, fingerprints, and so on.
They have daily schedules, bespoke
motivations, and - most importantly,
for the game’s fantasy - a sudden desire
to go off and murder a fellow citizen.
What follows next is a brilliant detective
game of looking for clues, following leads,
and putting all your notes on a crazy
corkboard, complete with pins and red thread.
But the procedural generation is
what I think you should focus on,
because its this crazy complex system that allows
for an infinite number of murders and missions,
with stories that feel completely
personal to each budding detective.
Games certainly don’t have to be filled
with complex systems - in fact, some of
the titles on this list are fantastic because
they focus on sheer simplicity and elegance.
But Shadows of Doubt shows what you can
make when you let the algorithm take over.
It’s on Steam, in early access.
So. There we have it.
Over the last 100 games, we've gone
from the arcades to virtual reality.
We've gone from generating simple
dungeons to generating entire city blocks.
We've seen genres being born, and we've
seen trends emerge, change, and die off.
And even with 100 games, this is
still a tiny, weenie slice of the pie.
I could happily pick another 100
games and I still wouldn't be done.
And this is just video games, after all.
There's just as much to be
learned from card games,
and board games, and tabletop roleplaying games.
And when you're done with all
of that, play even more games.
Play game jam games, and experimental games,
and art games, and serious
games, and educational games.
And every time you play a new
game, think about how it worked,
and how you can apply those lessons
to the games you make going forward.
Please do let me know all of the games I
forgot about in the comments down below.
You can also get this list
on the website backlogged
if you want to tick off the games you've played.
And who knows, maybe I'll be back in
another 10 years with another 100 games.
We'll see. Until then, thank
you so much for watching.
