Video games are full of randomness.
There are roguelikes with procedurally-generated
level layouts.
Role-playing games with random encounters.
Strategy games with unlucky misses.
And games that play with cards, dice, roulette
wheels, and random number generators, or RNG.
It’s all the same stuff, really: situations
and systems where the outcome is not fully
determined by the developer or the player,
but driven by the unpredictable whims of lady luck.
But while randomness is responsible for some
truly wonderful moments in gaming, it can
also be a cruel mistress that leads to unfair
outcomes and frustrating failures.
RNGesus - who is the personification of luck
in the gaming community - is cursed just as
often as he’s worshiped.
So, what gives?
Why does this single game design tool lead
to such radically different reactions?
Do we just like luck when it lands in our
favour, and hate it when we lose?
No, I don’t think so.
The truth is, some game designers actually
split randomness into two distinctly different
concepts - and recognising these differences
can be the secret to wrangling RNG, and making
luck more fun than frustrating.
I’m Mark Brown, you’re watching Game Maker’s
Toolkit, and this is the two types of random.
Before we get to that, though, I think we
need to talk about why randomness is used
in game design, at all.
For starters, randomness is used to provide
variety.
Well-made algorithms can pump out practically
infinite set-ups, levels, characters, and problems.
Sure, a procedurally generated level is almost
never as good as a completely hand-crafted
one - but the clear advantage is diversity
and quantity.
You couldn’t make a game like Shadow of
Mordor, with its unique cast of Orc captains;
or Minecraft, with its infinitely-large worlds,
without a big dollop of randomness.
Some games generate content once, and then
distribute that to all players - that’s
how every No Man’s Sky player gets to explore
the same set of, uh, 18 quintillion planets.
Other games generate new content every time
you play, which is how games in the roguelike
genre work.
That can be beneficial because by removing
the ability to endlessly replay the same level
and memorise every aspect of the stage, players
are forced to master the underlying mechanics
of the game itself - so they’re ready for
absolutely anything the algorithm might throw
at them.
Randomness is also a way to balance a multiplayer
game.
Basically, lucky rolls and unlucky draws can
limit the importance of pure skill, and give
newer players a chance to get ahead.
That’s especially true when the randomness
is weighted in favour of new players, such
as in Mario Kart where the random item boxes
are way more generous to the players at the
back of the pack, than those in first place.
This is usually only desirable when it’s
expected that players of vastly different
skill levels will be playing together - otherwise,
the randomness can obscure who is actually
the most skilled combatant.
So that’s why it appears more often in party
games and board games for families, and not
esport-level stuff.
Randomness can also be used to make rewards
in games more exciting.
Grabbing an awesome new weapon from a dead
body in a looter shooter like Borderlands
is way more exciting when you know there was
only a small chance for that gun to drop.
This can, of course, be taken to the extreme,
creating a Skinner box trick that’s designed
to sap your time or, more perniciously, your
wallet.
And finally, randomness can play a role in
the player’s formation of plans - which
are strategies that take a number of steps
to achieve.
Making plans requires information - which
is essentially the current state of the game’s
variables like the enemy’s location, health,
and perhaps even their intention for what
they’ll do on the next turn.
The more information we have, the better our
plans can be.
But too much information can actually be quite
troublesome.
For one, complete transparency can lead to
players being able to calculate many possible
moves into the future to figure out the optimum
choice - a paralysis of analysis which can
be super tedious, but you already know how
players can optimise the fun out of a game.
This can already happen on a single turn of
Into the Breach, which is a tactics game that
shows you the entire board and every enemy’s
plan for their upcoming turn.
You can spend 10, 20 minutes just staring
at a static screen, figuring out the ramifications
of every choice you might make.
Plus, we can create airtight plans which rarely
fail - like in Plants vs Zombies where we
get to see the exact cast of upcoming monsters
and can quite easily create the perfect defence.
This can create flat and uneventful gameplay,
as it’s often much better when plans get
disrupted with surprising new information
- forcing us to react, regroup, and replan.
There’s never been a good movie where the
heroes come up with a scheme and it just perfectly
works as intended.
Drama is driven by the unexpected.
So we generally want to cap the amount of
information the player has access to.
The game designer Keith Burgun calls this
the information horizon, defined as “the
distance between the current turn, and the
point at which information becomes known to
a player”.
And there are four main ways to do this - exponential
complexity, like the ever-expanding matrix
of game states in chess.
Execution uncertainty, which comes from the
player’s unpredictable ability to carry
out skill-based challenges.
Hidden information, like the fog-of-war that
hides the enemy’s plans in Starcraft.
And, the one we’re talking about today - randomness
- like not knowing what the enemies will do
on the next turn in Into the Breach.
You can’t make perfect plans if certain
factors are, by design, completely unpredictable.
So, randomness certainly has a role in game
design.
But to really get to grips with it, we need
to break it down into two types - which game
designers frequently refer to as input randomness,
and output randomness.
Input randomness is when a random event occurs
before the player gets to make a decision.
The most obvious take on this is the procedurally
generated levels in a roguelike, because they’re
cobbled together and then you get to play
in them.
Other examples are drawing a hand of cards
before taking your turn in a deckbuilder,
or rolling dice and then choosing where to
spend them in Dicey Dungeons.
Output randomness, though, is when you make
a decision and then luck takes over and the
game tells you what happened.
The most infamous example of this is hit chances
in XCOM, where you tell your soldier to shoot
an alien - but it’s down to chance whether
your bullets will actually hit their target.
Other examples are not knowing what the enemy
will do until after you press “End Turn”
or, I guess, paying for a lootbox and only
afterwards being told what was in it.
I’ve heard the same concepts be called pre-luck
and post-luck, by Civilzation 4 designer Soren Johnson.
But let’s stick to input and output for
this video.
These two terms were first introduced, as
far as I can tell, on the podcast Ludology
GEOFF ENGELSTEIN: “In general, I find this distinction
between input and output randomness to be
very valuable.
I think this is the fundamental difference
between randomness that supports strategy,
and randomness that undercuts strategy”.
The host, Geoff Engelstein, makes a good point
there.
Output randomness is certainly more responsible
for anger and resentment than input randomness.
Output can take away control, and break your
plans not out of strategic incompetence but
sheer bad luck.
And most of the random stuff we like the least
in games can be labeled as output randomness
- such as random encounters and loot boxes.
So certain developers are becoming privy to
this - after FTL, which was stuffed to bursting
with swingy output randomness, Subset made
Into the Breach which almost exclusively features
input randomness - leading to a much fairer
and more strategic game.
And while early builds of Slay the Spire hid
what the enemies were planning to do until
after you finished your turn, the devs found
the game was way more fun when they switched
things so the random choice happened at the
start of your turn - allowing you to strategise
around your foes.
Output became input.
But I don’t think it’s just a case of
input randomness equals good, output randomness
equals bad.
They’re both tools that must be used wisely,
and poorly designed input randomness can wreck
a game, just like carefully tuned output randomness
can, sometimes, improve it.
With input randomness, these unpredictable
starting conditions can sometimes massively
dictate the likelihood of success.
So in Spelunky, these crates have random items
in them.
You’re much more likely to get something
mediocre like bombs or ropes than something
amazing like a shotgun or jetpack - but if
you are so lucky as to get one of these items
at the start of the game, you’re going to
have a much easier time of things.
This can make it hard to tell if your success
was down to skill, or just good luck.
And it can also make runs where you don’t
get the goodies feel slightly pointless.
Some speedrunners will just restart the game
over and over again until luck is in their
favour, and they get good items in an early
crate or shop.
To be fair, this does lend Spelunky an interestingly
spiky texture.
But designers have found some clever new ways
to present random starting conditions.
In Slay the Spire, the devs didn’t want
you to just hit restart until you got some
really powerful cards or a relic at the beginning
of your run.
So they introduced a system where you start
the game with additional bonuses - but only
if you made it to the first boss on your previous
go.
This encourages players to at least try to
play with the stuff they’re given, and who
knows - maybe they’ll still find a strategy
that can see them be victorious.
Another way is to control the randomness in
some fashion, to reduce the chaos that it
can bring.
When setting up the tabletop game Pandemic,
you start by removing all of the epidemic
cards from the play deck.
These cards are terrifying game-changing events
that can completely demolish your team.
You then split the remaining cards into four
piles, and shuffle one epidemic card into
each.
Finally, you stack the four piles together
to create a finished deck.
It’s a bit of a faff, but it’s a clever
way of ensuring that you always have a pretty
fair game, where epidemic events happen evenly
throughout the adventure.
It’s impossible to have, say, three epidemics
at the very start, or no epidemics until long
after you’ve cured all the diseases.
But there’s still a chance of getting two
epidemics in a row, or having an epidemic
on the very first turn - though, neither of
these would break the game, and the odds are
slim enough for those to be exciting, surprising,
one-off events.
I’ve never said the word epidemic so many
times.
And, actually, lots of games put limits on
their randomness.
Diablo 3 has a smart loot system, where you’re
more likely to find items that match the character
class you’re playing - to reduce the likelihood
of finding pointless hats and swords.
And in modern versions of Tetris, the game
doesn’t just pick a block at random for
every drop.
Instead, the game generates a random sequence
of all seven blocks and then delivers them
in that order - before making a new sequence.
This ensures that you’ll always get a diverse
selection of blocks, and there’s an absolute
maximum of twelve garbage blocks between two
gorgeous I-blocks.
Sometimes called line pieces, or Colin Blocksworth.
And, for what it’s worth, while Spelunky
typically has a low chance of randomly giving
you one of these icky dark levels - the game
won’t spawn one if you finished the previous
stage in under 20 seconds, just to be merciful
to speedunners.
Another thing to consider is how often are
new input randomness events occurring?
If these occur at the start of every single
turn, it can have the effect of drawing the
information horizon in claustrophobically
close - and stopping you from making plans
that last any time at all.
Designers should, ideally, consider their
game’s information flow - a term invented
by Ethan Hoeppner in the article Plan Disruption.
He points to XCOM, where we can make strategic
plans about how we want to approach each mission
and for a good few turns our plan will be
pretty viable - not perfect, thanks to all
the output randomness.
But close enough.
But every now and again, you’ll stumble
onto a new pod of enemies, or a fresh bunch
of foes will descend onto the battlefield.
This unexpected spike in new information disrupts
your plans and forces you to stop, regroup
and rethink.
He says “a good pattern to follow is the
spiky information flow, in which high-impact
information is collected into discrete spikes
that happen at regular intervals, with a slow,
regular flow of information between the spikes”.
As for output randomness - you might wonder
why developers would want to use it at all.
Well, for starters, this sort of randomness
can be a good way of simulating mistakes and
inaccuracies in a game with an abstract combat
system - which is games where you tell characters
to perform an action rather than doing the
action yourself.
If your units never missed, then that wouldn’t
be particularly realistic.
Also, output randomness forces players to
think about risk management, and to create
contingency plans if things go wrong - which
I think are totally valid skills to test.
There’s this idea that output randomness
essentially becomes input randomness for the
next turn, because you’ll be dealing with
the consequences of whatever just happened.
Essentially: the best XCOM players are those
who have a backup plan if their shots miss.
And there are also methods to make output
randomness feel more fun.
One way is to get away from binary hit or
miss mechanics.
In Phoenix Point - which comes from original
XCOM designer Julian Gollop - each bullet
fired is simulated through a ballistics system
so you might find that some of your bullets
hit, and some of them miss - which is way
less annoying than XCOM’s punitive complete
miss.
It can also be important to show the player
the odds, because this allows them to make
way more informed decisions about which risks
they’re willing to take, or how their actions
- like moving closer to the enemy - can impact
their chances of success.
Unfortunately, though, humans are just really
bad at understanding odds.
That’s thanks to countless cognitive biases
in our pattern-seeking brains that make it
really hard to deal with random numbers.
In fact, game developers frequently lie about
the actual chances of things happening, so
the probability in games better matches the
broken probability in our heads.
The numbers in most Fire Emblem games are
subtly massaged in the player’s favour so
- for example - a 90% chance to hit is actually
more like a 99% chance.
If you lose two 33% chance battles in Civilization,
the third will always succeed because that’s
how we think numbers work.
And there’s allegedly a pity timer in Hearthstone,
to ensure you’ll always get a legendary
card after a certain number of empty packs.
If number manipulation isn’t your thing,
one of the best ways to get around this is
to ditch those cold, unknowable computer calculations
in favour of recognisable, real-world mechanisms
- like a six-sided die.
Zach Gage, creator of the dice-filled space
survival game Tharsis, says “we understand
things that we can hold in our hand.
When things get abstract, especially with
math, it becomes very difficult.
Human beings just have this innate understanding
of stuff that we can touch and hold and turn,
and look at.
The dice in Tharsis are an analogue for something
everyone is familiar with”.
Tharsis, and the similarly tabletop-inspired
Armello, even include physics systems to drive
their digital dice - in an effort to make
them seem even more realistic.
Other games use cards - another familiar,
real-world favourite.
Cards are interesting because where dice feature
independent probability - i.e. each throw
of the die has zero impact on the next one
- cards can have dependent probability - i.e.
by drawing a card and removing it from the
deck, you’ve now changed the makeup of the
deck and impacted the probability of the next
draw.
It’s the latter that makes it possible to
rack up ridiculously fun synergies in Slay
the Spire.
It can also be good to have output randomness
in places that will only ever be in the player’s favour.
The only real example of output randomness
in Into the Breach is the game’s building
defence system where there’s a very small
chance that the enemy’s attack will actually
miss and save you from surefire defeat.
It’s so small that you never actually count
on it to save it you, but boy does it feel
good when it lands.
Here’s the game’s co-designer, Justin
Ma.
JUSTIN MA: "We found that if there’s randomness where
you’re expecting something bad and then
you get something good, no one ever ever complains.
So that’s the only kind of randomness, output
randomness, that we left in the game”.
So randomness can be an incredibly important
part of games.
It’s used for variety, balance, rewards,
the information horizon, and probably more
things I’ve forgotten about.
But because it can impact everything from
fairness to player psychology, it’s something
that designers must use with great care and
attention.
Understanding the difference between input
and output randomness is perhaps the most
important thing to learn - but it’s also
crucial to realise that neither of these is
a silver bullet or a dastardly trap.
Both can endanger or improve a game’s design
- depending on how they are used.
But when used correctly, randomness can do
amazing things.
It can create surprises and unique situations.
It can force the constant reevaluation of
strategies.
And it can turn players into risk-calculating
tacticians.
Thanks so much for watching.
I’ve put some links in the description to
some resources if you want to learn more about
the technical side of random number generation.
And also to head off the comments about how
computers can’t do “true randomness”.
I also want to give a huge thank you to my
patrons - especially those who helped contribute
towards this video in my new GMTK Workshop.
It’s a thing for $5 backers, where they
get to see early versions of certain new videos,
and provide feedback or suggestions.
Their help was invaluable on this episode.
