Indie games are often defined by their scope. And
that's because a game that's too ambitious either
never gets finished or it takes far too long. I
think anyone who's intending to make and release
indie games should be familiar with as many indie
games as possible because the successful ones are
often a masterclass in scope management. Many
newcomers get given the advice to make small
games. And I think that advice can be quite
unhelpful on its own without examples of what
good small games look like. The advice to make
smaller games is about focus. It's about making
games which are more polished because if you spend
the same amount of time and resources on a fewer
amount of things, then ideally those things will
all be made to a higher standard. I also recently
received a comment from one of you, which I think
is actually indicative of how a lot of people see
this. Matt said, "When people said make smaller
games, I always focused on shorter games, which
was absolutely the wrong message and it didn't
really click until I watched this video." Some
people hear the thing about making smaller games
and then they just kind of make whatever they want
to make and they make a small version of it. So,
if your aspiration is to make a moa or an open
world action game or Resident Evil 10 or whatever,
you still kind of plow ahead with that idea, but
you just make it shorter because you've taken the
advice to make a small game. But that's not really
what people are getting at when they talk about
making small games. They're talking about making a
focused game with fewer parts. And just to clarify
before we start, because I'm not interested in
doing any kind of bait type thing here, I'm going
to give you three main strategies for subtractive
design or scope management, whatever you want to
call it. And I'm going to tell you these up front
so that you know what's coming. The first one is
to try and make games which have fewer characters
in or which have no characters at all. The second
one is to try and make games which limit the need
for level design or environmental art. And
the third one is to make games with fewer
mechanics and systems in them or which revolve
around a specific mechanic and make that the
entire game. Those are the three categories. Most
successful indie games tend to have been designed
using these subtractive strategies in some way.
deliberate sets of constraints on what the game
will and won't include. And this is what has led
to us having whole genres of game which exist
only in the indie space and not in AAA or mobile
casual markets. So let's consider some examples.
Games with fewer characters.
Characters can be a lot of work. You have
to animate them, write dialogue for them,
make them do stuff in the game world. The
relationship between the character, the controls,
and the camera work is so crucial in action games
that in big AAA teams, they have whole teams that
just deal with that. It's called the three C's.
You can literally get a job just as a three C's
designer or programmer. If you're making games on
your own, it might make sense to avoid characters
entirely. Some game types naturally don't feature
characters in the first place. You know, blockd
dropping games and stuff like that. But there are
also lots of clever ways that indie devs find to
make characterful, lively, seeming game worlds
without necessarily having to animate or simulate
humans running around everywhere. One common
approach is to put the player in some desolate
place with the story goal of learning what
happened there. This happens in The Walking Sim,
Gone Home, where we learn about an absent suburban
family based on documents and personal artifacts.
In puzzle games like Portal, The Talos Principle,
and Blueprints, we're also left in environments
where there is a strong narrative explanation
for the absence of other humans. In each case,
the absence of characters, something which
would be unthinkable in large budget AAA games,
is turned into a strength of the game's
mood rather than a shortcoming. And this
is a important overall point is that you need
to find ways to cut out the amount of work you
need to do as a developer, but those things still
need to make the game feel good for players. Games
that use desolation or loneliness are an example
of subtractive design where we're removing the
need to have characters and in doing so, we're
adding something for the player. Other games
do lean more heavily on characters and dialogue,
but find ways to avoid the arguably unnecessary
work of having humans doing stuff. Get you out
of here. With that antenna fixed, you can now
detect stabilized. In Pacific Drive, we operate a
retrofuturistic sentient car from a bodyless first
person perspective, interacting with humans only
through radio and voice recordings. In Dredge,
we steer a delightful little boat through a big
mysterious world. While we can visit seaside
towns to trade and gossip, the characters in
those locals are represented only as pop-up
illustrations. You probably already know this,
but cars and boats are easier to animate than
people. So, why not make them the main character
in a world where everyone else stays indoors?
Papers, Please, Reigns, and 80 Days are all
examples of very dialogue-driven and story rich
games where the player takes on a specific role, a
border guard, monarch, or a Victorian manservant,
and has to interact with a host of characters.
However, these are all games which are played
predominantly through a user interface and
which don't involve direct physical control
of a player character. Instead, we're tapping and
swiping on options or interacting only with game
world objects like luggage and documents. Those
objects might require some illustration skills,
but they don't need to be animated or walk
around or fight. They certainly don't need
to be able to climb into a bed and pull a blanket
over themselves. Unpacking tells a story about an
implied character simply by having the player
interact with their possessions. and operating
system simulator games like Hypnospace Outlaw use
fictionalized social media to tell stories about
people without the presence of those characters.
Now, if you don't care about characters and you
don't intend to make games featuring them,
you've probably already made your life easier
through that preference. But if characters are
essential to the type of game you want to make,
then you need to be conscious of the workload
that they're going to add for you and the ways
you might try to limit the impact of this or
reduce other elements of the game so that they
don't draw too much focus in comparison. If you're
going to make a game that's about characters, make
it about characters and and not about a million
other things. Area two, games with smaller worlds.
Now, AAA action games tend to feature massive
open worlds, or at least very rich physical
environments for running across, killing things,
and finding secrets and treasure. Level design is
a whole discipline in its own right, and it's a
separate skill set from making environmental art.
Consider the size of level design teams on larger
open world projects. So, Cyberpunk 2077 had 10
level designers. Elden Ring had 16 credited level
designers, including department leads. Assassin's
Creed Valhalla had more than 40 people involved in
level design spread across multiple international
teams. That should make it pretty clear why I
think open world games are not usually a viable
product for most indie developers unless you've
got some very smart tricks up your sleeve. So
here I'm going to talk about the ways that you can
limit the need for level design by either making
games that don't feature levels in the first place
or by using mechanics to force players to replay
the same levels so that you get more value out
of them. Now there are two main reasons you might
want to make a game with levels in the first place
and those are exploration and encounters. Right?
So combat usually takes place in a place and
games with combat in often feature some sort of
exploration as you go from place to place. And you
can have exploration driven games without combat
of course. But if we think back to this idea of
indie specific game genres, this is where we get
arena combat games like hyper demon and boss rush
games as well. The first thing I would encourage
you to think of here is if you want to make a game
about combat, it does not necessarily need to be
a free exploration game. You can also use game
mechanics to make players play through the same
thing over and over again. So, spot the difference
games are an example of doing this. And in terms
of using the same physical level over and over
again, uh, we've got anomaly games like Exit 8
and Shift 87 where players repeatedly pass through
the same environment and look for something out
of the ordinary. This is a very clever way of
using the same environmental assets over and over
again. And it's not that dissimilar from document
checking games like Papers, Please and Dead Letter
Department. These games, whether they're done
in a physical environment or through documents,
are all ways of using spot the difference to pass
players through what is largely the same content
over and over again. But difficulty can also be
a way of getting players to play the same content
all the way through. This is a classic thing that
difficulty is used for in games. If you think of
Soulslike games where they're quite difficult and
you have to do a corpse run to collect your stuff
when you die, that's all about making you replay
the same area over and over again. Difficulty has
been a way of squeezing more play time out of
the same content since the first video games
entered arcades. But it's not just super difficult
games that do this. In more casual and cozy games,
it's common to see star rankings on each level.
These are used to reward players for repeat
play of the same level with a small amount of
stars required to progress early in the game,
while later areas might require more stars to
unlock, forcing players to go back and master
those earlier levels. Difficulty is not a magic
wand for making a good game. And the difficulty
of your game should be appropriate to what players
expect based on a bunch of other factors like what
your game looks like, how grim your story is, and
all of that kind of stuff. But it is one of the
tools in your toolkit which allow you to do more
with less. limiting the amount of exploration in
your games or using difficulty and requiring the
player to replay the same game area over and over
again. These are different ways of getting more
value out of doing less development work. But you
can also choose game genres which don't involve
moving a character around in an environment
at all. And we've talked about some of these
already. Games like Papers, Please and 80 Days,
where you're predominantly interacting with
characters in a visual novel style and then
the world in a more abstract style. These are all
games that do not have an exploration element and
do not require you to move a player around in
an environment. Um, another example here I would
use are shop simulators. Games like the slice
of life coffee talk and the cyberpunk bar sim
Valhalla. Character-driven visual novels where
you also do some business element. The clever
thing about this format is it allows developers
to create a rich game world to tell a story in,
but you never really venture out into it. You
hear everything. You hear about that fantasy
or sci-fi setting by characters coming in and
talking to you. That all sort of makes sense to
the player because they know what they signed up
to. They know that they're playing a a business
management role where they stay in the cafe and
run the cafe. So, it doesn't feel like a copout.
So, if you're interested in world building and
want to make games with a strong sense of place
and history, it doesn't necessarily mean you
need to be physically making that world for
players to run around in it. So, before you make a
single environment or level for your game, I would
always encourage you to consider whether they
are even necessary, either at the current stage
of the project or at all. After all, level design
is an entire discipline in its own right, and your
game does not need to include every aspect of
video games in order to be interesting or fun.
Now, the last category has an overlap with the
first two, and this is going to be games with
fewer moving parts. So, games with less game
mechanics, games which focus on a specific
game mechanic. A good example of this would
be inventory management games. Games like
Backpack Hero and Over Looting contain some
aspects of a larger dungeon crawl like Diablo,
but they boil it down to just the inventory
management. And this means the developers can
still make games with lots of items, monsters, and
even varied locations. But the player character
doesn't need to be a controllable combat object,
and the enemies don't need to have pathing.
We're still doing a lot of the appealing thematic
stuff that would be in a dungeon crawler,
but we're cutting out big sets of features by just
focusing on the inventory management side. Now,
inventory management games are an example of what
I'd call genre descoping, which is where you take
an element from one larger genre and focus in
on it to make smaller and tighter experiences,
which still benefit from the same thematic
and fantasy appeal. So, if you think of
tower defense games, our modern tower defense
games came out of real-time strategy games,
but they took away most of the unit and map
control elements to focus entirely on the
base building and defending. That's an example
of one genre coming out of focusing in on one
single part of another genre. Backpack management
is like that. Tower defense is like that. Both of
those types of games point towards a possible
strategy for coming up with new innovative
sub-genres. You take an enjoyable element of a
larger game and blow it up until it's the entire
game. Did you know that this channel is funded
by Patreon? By signing up to my Patreon, you can
receive the following benefits. Socialize in the
Discord with myself and other people who share
a creative ethos. Take part in monthly supporter
streams where I play test your games and tell you
why they're rubbish. Get a warm fuzzy feeling in
your soul by financially supporting this channel,
ensuring that I don't have to go back to working
in a university or creating horrendous Skinner
boxes at a free-to-play games company. I've just
opened a new tier on the Patreon and this is for
people that don't like this channel and want
me to stop doing what I'm doing. for £10,000
a month, you can get me to stop making content
indefinitely. The channel will stay up, but if
someone pays that £10,000 a month, I will not make
any more content the whole time their subscription
is active. But if you like my content and you
would like to support at a lower rate, then those
lower tiers are available and they do not cost
£10,000 a month. Thanks. Now, back to the video.
So, some final words on what it really means
to make small scope games. If you're an avid
gamer and you play lots of indie games, you
probably already be able to think of other
design patterns I haven't talked about here which
allow indie developers to do more with less. So,
other types of subtractive design. The trick,
I think, to making a good indie game is to
identify ways of making your life easier as a
developer and doing less work without skimping
on the end player experience. I think this
comes back to a fantastic quote by Nintendo
Shigeru Miyiamoto, which is a good idea solves two
problems. In the cases we're talking about, a good
idea is one which solves the problem of making
a smaller game, making a more manageable game,
having less to do while still adding something
to the game. So, how can we take something away
that also adds something? And the thing that's
added is often focus like by just controlling
a little boat and not also controlling a little
person, we get a game which is very focused and
has a particular mood. By setting our puzzle game
in a desolate space with no humans in, we add a
particular mood to that game, you're taking things
away in order to add something so that it doesn't
just feel like a copout or a cheapkate approach.
So, when you're scoping out your games and you're
thinking about what you need to make for them,
be critical of all these elements and think about
whether the game that you're trying to make, the
the particular mechanics you're interested in,
the particular fantasy or backstory you're
interested in, does it actually need all of these
things in order for you to deliver that? Does your
game need NPCs that can walk around of their own
valition and chat with each other and do things in
the background? Does the game you're making even
need levels? What do levels add to a game? Is it
is it context? Is it variety? Okay. Well, maybe
your game has a different way of doing variety
that doesn't require levels or these are all kind
of thought processes that you should go through
as a designer and you should make these decisions
yourself. A lot of the examples I've talked
about here are from teams of five, you know,
10 people. And if those slightly larger indie
game teams use these subtractive design patterns
um and feel like they need to and and a lot of
them are, you know, teams that are formed out of
people that previously worked in other commercial
game studios, right? So these are veterans. These
are often people that have some sort of background
in games before they go off and make their indie
games and they use these sensible subtractive
strategies. then it kind of shows how unsensible
it is to try and make something bigger and more
extravagant when you only have one or two people.
In the larger games business, you usually have
someone who is in charge of the creative side of
things and making sure the game is as exciting
as possible. These could be a design director,
it could be a creative lead, whatever. Uh they're
like the creative vision holder of the game. And
then you also have someone who is in charge of the
practical side of things like is this thing even
going to get made? And maybe they're like a CTO,
maybe they're ahead of a production. It doesn't
matter. But those are the kind of two sides of
the business that need to work in order for any
game to get finished. And the thing about being
a small scale indie team or a solo developer is
you have to think about both of those things.
As someone who's working on your own game,
you are your own boss in that situation. And that
means you need to be both sides of the business,
which is like the the creative side that cares
about players and the production side that cares
about practicalities. You have to be both of those
things if you've decided to make your own game.
And that means that whenever you make a creative
choice about what to do or what not to do,
you're thinking about in terms of does this make
my life easier or my team's life easier? And also,
how does it impact the player experience?
And it will be a lot easier for you to make
decisions and develop quickly if you care about
both those things. Because when you get those
things in alignment, it becomes a filter for
all of your ideas and you can pass the ideas
through it and say, "Does this idea make the game
easier to make? And does this idea make the game
better for a player?" And then the the good ideas
present themselves much more quickly cuz the good
ideas are the ones that kind of tick both boxes.
A good game idea, whether it's an idea for your
whole game or an idea that you're considering
in relation to a game you're already making,
like a smaller part of the game, a good idea
is one which allows you to do more with less.
One which allows you to take stuff away from the
game without taking anything away from the game.
