Mages, thieves, clerics, warriors. When
most people think of tabletop
role-playing games, they usually think
of these kind of iconic character roles
or classes. Now, of course, RPGs come in
all flavors, so those specific
archetypes can change to suit the game
setting. Everything from psychics,
vampires, robots, superheroes, or any
concept in between can be packaged up
and presented as an easy-to-grasp
template. But whether you're working on
a cool homebrew option or designing your
own system from scratch, what are some
of the best design philosophies to
follow when crafting classes for your
players to enjoy?
Thanks so much to Ting Mobile for not
playing games with our phone bills.
Since our friend Eddie Webb has been
designing RPGs for more than 20 years,
heck yeah, we wanted to pick his
industry brain about how he designs
character classes. Because a lot of his
work on games like Realms of Pugmire and
Vampire the Masquerade have been focused
on not only creating character classes,
but also modifying and updating old
ones. So, he's thought a lot about makes
a good class and how a designer can
adjust a lackluster one into something
that really pops. Plus, he's just a
class act in general. Hey-o!
Eddie likes to define a character class
as a pre-packaged character concept or
archetype. And this can take a lot of
forms, even if they're not explicitly
called classes. It might be a playbook
in a game like Monster Hearts, where you
can pick a few options from an
established list. Or it could be a
character type you select, such as your
clan in Vampire the Masquerade, which
presents a strong personality archetype
that you build your character within.
But really, if it's a predetermined
profession or character role that
impacts your gameplay, we're calling it
a class for the purposes of this
discussion. So, what are the elements
you need to think about when designing a
class that could one day become a
classic? Well, the first step is coming
up with a variety of interesting roles
for your characters to play in your
game. And you can think of each class as
a slice of that anticipated gameplay. In
team-based games, some roles will be
obvious. There's the person who damages
things, the person that gets damaged by
things, the person who heals things, and
so on. But, keep in mind, basing a class
solely on the role the character
performs on a team is only one way to
divvy up class concepts. In Vampire: The
Masquerade, for example, each of the
vampire clans is actually based on a
style of vampire movie. The anarchistic
Brujah are like the punk vampires in
Lost Boys, whereas the aristocratic
Toreador kind of channel some Lestat
vibes from Interview with the Vampire.
And sure, there's some overlap. For
instance, both kind of vampires are
supernaturally fast, but describing a
kind of vampire you saw in a movie once
can sometimes be a clearer hook to
players rather than simply outlining the
individual powers you get. It also works
when you do both. When Eddie was
reworking the Dungeons & Dragons system
for Pugmire, he had to reskin the
narrative flavor around each class into
something that would work in his
pet-centric world. For instance, wizards
typically cast spells they've memorized
or otherwise learned. However, his dogs
don't cast spells so much as they use
abandoned technology and believe it to
be magic. So, his wizards, called
artisans, need to carry a physical
object which actually cast a spell to
reflect that shift. The role of wizards
on the team is still clearly defined,
but there's some additional narrative
texture to explore. And once you throw
players a bone like that, they'll be
psyched to sink their teeth into it.
Wait, what? Oh, cuz bone, teeth.
Next, you'll need to focus on each
class's play style. Specifically, making
sure each class has some things the
player knows their character is designed
to do well mechanically while they play.
Because if each class doesn't have a
clear focus, players simply won't know
what to do when it's time for the dice
to hit the table. If you're playing a
guardian in Pugmire, even the name tells
you a lot of what you're going to be
doing, guarding and protecting others.
Even though there's a lot of narrative
room inside that idea, ranging from a
disgruntled city guard to a noble knight
of the realm to an aloof mercenary with
a taste for the finer things. But, no
matter where your player lands, each of
those characters is probably going to
know how to throw a punch or two.
Because good mechanics encourage the
player to shape their play style toward
that related concept. Now, sometimes
these mechanics are obvious. A healer
needs healing abilities after all, but
other times they can be more subtle.
Stemming from either exclusive abilities
that only a specific class has access to
or bonuses to common abilities that the
class should naturally be better at. And
one of the coolest things you can do
with your classes is actually make that
play style come from a mechanical
weakness. When Eddie was working on
Vampire for its 20th anniversary
edition, he and his collaborator, Justin
Achilli, agreed that the Tremere, a clan
of blood mages, needed a better, or
worse I suppose, clan weakness. And
after discussing it for several days,
they hit on an incredibly simple idea.
See, in the game, vampires usually
become emotionally enthralled to another
vampire after three drinks of their
blood, you know, like you do. But what
if these blood mages, who were always
dealing with blood, get enthralled after
only two? And right there, the full
scope of the Tremere snapped into focus.
All from an interesting push and pull
between needing to drink blood and being
terrified of drinking too much. Also,
every class needs some element of niche
protection so that their distinct
concept can shine through. Granted, some
games do this through exclusivity, such
as only letting vampire blood magicians
use vampire blood magic. But remember
that it doesn't mean that each class has
to be the only ones able to do a thing.
It just means that they should generally
be the best at a thing. For instance,
anyone can pick a pocket if they try
hard enough, but a thief or a ratter in
Pugmire should simply have more
opportunities to succeed at pocket
picking. And finally, remember, classes
are at their best when they not only get
out of each other's way, but actually
harmonize together. And you can think of
this kind of like being in a band. Each
person in a band has a clear role, and
they focus on doing their role as well
as they can. And the variety of skills
each player brings to the table enhances
their music. I mean, there's a reason
there's not too many bands that are made
up of all bassists. You know, funkiness
aside. Also, what can be neat is
sometimes people can switch around, like
when the lead singer picks up a guitar
or a drummer sings backup vocals.
Because despite their specialties, they
can all assist each other in making
loud, glorious, kick-ass music. Or go
kill the frost troll or whatever it is
they're doing. I'm getting my metaphors
mixed up, but it's the same thing, trust
me. So, when designing a class, remember
to think about potential interesting
roles, play style, mechanics, niche
protection, and weaknesses. And if you
can balance that variety along with your
flavorful details, you'll ensure that
your players will feel like their
characters are an important, and dare I
say, classy part of your game world.
That wasn't meant to be a joke. Do you
just live on those drums now?
And speaking of unfunny things, how's
all your phone bills looking these days?
Ooh, that's a yikes. Well, luckily we're
back with a money-saving deal from the
new and improved Ting Mobile. They've
got a plan that can work on anybody's
budget. For instance, if you just need
unlimited talk and text, they've got you
covered for only 10 bucks a month. Or
depending on your data needs, Ting has
plans starting at 15 bucks all the way
to the mighty unlimited talk, text, and
data for just 45. Meaning there's a
perfect plan for you and your family.
Oh, and speaking of families, oh Jeff,
yeah, how much have you saved in the
last 3 months on your family's two
phones and an iPad?
Over $230.
Wait a minute, that means you're on
track to save like more than 900 bucks
this year. Looks like someone's getting
a new PlayStation and an Xbox. What's
really neat though is the only thing
that actually changes is you getting a
lower monthly phone bill. You still get
robust nationwide LTE and 5G coverage,
not to mention access to Ting's
award-winning customer service. Plus,
and this is my favorite, no contracts
ever. Not to mention, switching has
never been easier. Just head to extra
credits.ting.com to check your phone's
compatibility, create an account, and
pick the plan that's right for you. Oh,
and if you bring your phone, you'll also
get a $25 service credit to try Ting
with no strings attached. And because
using our link, again, that's extra
credits.ting.com, helps support the
shows you love while lowering your phone
bill at the same time, there's really
never been a better time to try Ting.
A legendary thanks to Ahmed Ziad Turk,
Joseph Blade, Alicia Bramble, Kyle
Murgatroyd, Casey Muscha, Orioles 1, and
Dominic Valenciana for all of their
support.
