Hello. It's been a little while since I
did one of these longer video essays on
some aspect of game design theory. Today
I want to talk about repetition and
variety in games [music] and the
importance of these two things. And
we'll talk about them from a general
kind of theory point of view. And then
towards the end of the video, I'm going
to give some kind of practical uh not
exercises, but approaches you can use in
your game to kind of getting this
balance right. Inside of your game,
there are two forces at work, and they
are repetition and variation. Repetition
is [music]
the thing that makes your game a game in
the first place. Really, [music] the
more repetitive your game is, the easier
it's going to be for players to learn
because they need to sort of take in all
these rules about how your game world
and your controls work and then use them
and they need to be able to operate them
consistently in order to even consider
what they're doing to be a game and not
just button bashing. Repetition can also
give us these emotional elements of
playing games like familiarity and
comfort. And that's why you might have a
really strange comfort game that other
people don't think is a comfort game
because you're just so used to the
repetitive elements of it that it gets
you into a particular kind of state. And
then variation is the force in the game
that provides these opposing or
complimentary uh emotional things like
surprise and delight. But it's also
important from a mechanical perspective
because it kind of stops players uh
resting on their laurels and getting too
comfortable. If you've got any type of
game that is about exercising a skill,
whether that's an action game or a
strategy game, the variety in those
games is going to provide variations on
the core skill. Right? If the only way
that your game ramps up in difficulty is
to like add health to enemies and, you
know, reduce a time limit and stuff like
that, um the player is going to be
tested a little bit more on their core
skill, but they're not going to be
required to actually think differently
about the game. types of variation like
levels with different stuff [music] in
them, encounters with different kinds of
enemies that actually do different
things. [music]
All of these things add up to a game
that stops getting stale over time
because over time you're going to be
tested in slightly different ways. One
of the things I would say specifically
in relation to the indie space and
people making smallcale solo games is
[music]
you do need to find a way to be generous
with the variety in your games because I
think this is fundamentally why in a lot
of cases people choose one game over a
similar game. You can pick any genre of
games that is popular and the one that
is most popular out of those is usually
just really generous with the types of
kind of content variation it has in it.
Whether those things are, you know,
different levels or different
unlockables or strategic elements like
cards in a card game that allow you to
do different things. From a practical
point of view as a small indie, the
thing you should be thinking about is
where is the best place to spend your
time to give fans of the genre you're
doing the kind of variety that they care
about. because you could spend loads of
time making lots of different hats. And
if you're making a grand strategy 4X
game, those type of players maybe aren't
going to care so much about the hats. I
don't know.
[music]
This is a talk about why you should try
and balance these two forces. And I'm
also going to give some advice on how to
practically achieve this in terms of a
production workflow. And [music]
we'll start off with game loop theory. A
lot of game design theory at the intro
level focuses entirely on the repetition
side. And that is because the repetitive
[music]
rules-based part of a game is what makes
the core gameplay. It's what makes that
game what it is. You will often hear
this quote about Halo from one of the
designers of Halo 1 and 2, 30 seconds of
fun that happened over and over and over
again. Uh Jamie Griezmer, the person
that said this initial quote, they said
that they were misqued. There was a
whole second half of that quote that was
about taking that 30 seconds of fun
playing in different environments with
different weapons, different vehicles,
against [music] different enemies,
against different combinations of
enemies, sometimes against enemies that
are fighting each other. No 30-cond
stretch of Halo is ever repeated. The
missions are constantly changing the
context on you. Right? This is how Halo
was actually designed. And then this is
how [music] the Halo formula is often
presented to people when it's edited
down into a sound bite. So we emphasize
the repetition and we forget to talk
about the variety. All of this is why
recently I did a video where I yelled at
you about game loops and some
programmers got very upset that I wasn't
talking about their game loops. That's
not what game loop means. Game loop is
when every frame you draw something to
the screen. I know it means something
different in programming, but game
design isn't actually a subset of
programming. It's its own discipline,
and sometimes we have different uses for
the same word. So, if you're still
struggling with what a game loop is to a
game designer, I will tell you in a
minute. Some game design theory people
got very upset that I was being flippant
and I didn't seem to understand what
game loops are in game design. So, let's
just run through that first.
>> [music]
>> Games have loops in them. And what I
mean by this is strings of behavior that
are repetitive and go over and over
again. So you don't really need to think
of them as a circular loop, but is you
do ABC. Maybe it varies sometimes. You
go ABC D ABC, but generally you're doing
sets of things over and over again. And
that's broadly what we mean when [music]
we talk about a game loop. A basic game
loop has this set of elements in it. So
the bit that most of us are familiar
with will be the challenge that the
player is actually doing, right? They're
doing that to get a reward and before
the challenge they anticipate the
challenge so they can see it coming,
right? This is an important distinction
with anything mechanical in games is
that the player sort of needs to
understand what's going on because the
game play isn't just what's happening on
the screen, it's also what's happening
in the player's head. But this is the
most basic game loop. So, if you imagine
a dungeon crawler, it could be we're in
a dungeon and we approach a new room in
the dungeon. Because we've played this
game for a while and we've played other
games like it, we anticipate that
there's going to be a challenge in that
room, which will probably be an enemy
encounter, but it could be other things
like traps. And then we take on the
challenge and we expect to get some sort
of reward, even if it's just like little
bits of XP from clearing the room. But
the thing is, a more detailed
understanding of game loops actually has
them nested. So to go back to the
dungeon crawler example, if you imagine
these red circles are someone clearing
out a room and then the blue circle is
someone clearing out a dungeon, right?
So there's one slower, longer repetitive
cycle of go to a dungeon, clear out the
whole dungeon, move on to the next
dungeon, and then within that there are
loops of clearing out specific rooms.
So, uh-oh, it is fractals. Because games
aren't just one looping thing repeating,
unless they're a really, really simple
game like Flappy Bird. Most modern
games, even relatively small indie
games, made by one or two people, are
not just one set of of repetitive things
happening over again. They're multiple.
And some of them are happening inside
each other, like kind of gears moving
around in a complex machine. And this is
kind of why we use the term mechanics to
talk about the interactive parts of
games. because they're all interrelated
and they're all moving around together.
It can be quite daunting to think of the
repetitive elements of games when you
get down to this fractal level of
understanding stuff like, okay, I have
an encounter with an enemy, and that
happens within the loop of entering
rooms, clearing them out, collecting all
the treasure in the rooms, and then that
happens within the loop of clearing out
a level, and then maybe that happens
within the loop of exploring all the
stuff in a region and then unlocking the
next region. Right? This is not really
as complicated as it sounds. Nested
loops can be confusing when we think of
them as circles rather than in terms of
the player's linear experience over
time. We design them as circles cuz we
think, I want the player to do this,
this, this over and over again, and then
maybe they take a break and do this,
this, and this. So, we tend to visualize
them as loops. But there are other
things in our culture that are loops
that we do not visualize in this way.
And I will draw an example from music
that some of you have probably heard me
use before. But you can visualize a loop
from the side and then it just becomes a
representation of the player's linear
experience over time. This is already
how music software visualizes loops. You
see the loop from the side. Each of
these little golden yellow things on
here is a loop of drums. Four bars of
drums. And then maybe these purple
things are, I don't know, like 16 bars
of piano chords or something. But they
are loops. They happen over and over
again, but we view them from the side.
And this allows us to see that they are
stacked on top of each other or inside
each other. And it's really not that
complicated. But this is closer to how
most games work because most games do
not just have one simple anticipation
and challenge loop or reward and
investment loop. They have multiple of
them sitting on top of each other. And
so before we even get into thinking
about variation by sort of changing the
elements of the game like the levels and
encounters and stuff like that, we can
think about how you get some organic
variation just from having multiple
loops that sit on top of each other and
start and stop at different times, just
like pieces of music in a song. [music]
>> [music]
>> Playing a game is a person performing
over a period of time. That is why
you'll often hear game designers or game
studies theorists pull from other
disciplines, whether it's music or
sports. Musical metaphors can help us to
think about gameplay as performance over
time. So an example of this would be
Swink's book game feel which uses attack
sustain decay is actually from
synthesizer design. So when uh you look
at the controls on anything that
generates sound it uses these terms.
This is just one example of this, but
you can use any theory from anything to
do with performance [music] over time
and you can apply it to game design in
in some cases. You know, you can think
of as a game as a song. It has certain
things that we do over and over again
and we do them very quickly. Hitting an
enemy until they fall down and then
moving on to the next one is a
repetitive thing that only takes a few
seconds. Whereas like clearing out a
whole room or a whole dungeon is a
longer repetitive thing that contains
lots of those smaller things. So it's
kind of like this model I've got here
where you know the drum loops are
sitting above the guitar chords and they
take less time to go around because it's
a shorter loop. Right? So a game is kind
of like a song in that respect. If
you're not interested in music stuff,
don't worry. We're going to move on from
it now. But the reason I think it's
helpful to think of it this way is that
a lot of us have a better innate
understanding of music and how pop songs
are structured than we do of games. And
I think some of that is because uh music
is just a much more normalized art form
across the whole of society. And it's
also because games take so long to play
that it's often hard to really perceive
what's happening as you play them.
Unless you're like really good at
discussing them with friends and like
verbalizing your experience, you might
not really notice how they're
structured. The other reason I think
it's helpful to think of a game as a
song is you can think of the way that a
song is structured to go repetition,
repetition, repetition. Oh, something
different. Repetition, repetition,
repetition. Oh, something different.
That's generally what we're trying to
produce in a in a game as well. And if
we were to think of like what makes a
small indie game a bad game, it usually
comes down to going too far into one
extreme. It's a game that is absolutely
repetitive, is not very generous with
its content, is basically just asking
you to do the same thing over and over
again with no development, no surprises,
and so on. Or it's a game that is such a
weird mish mash of stuff that doesn't
fit together and doesn't cohhere because
the developer has chucked loads of stuff
in before they've actually worked out a
solid core of repetitive action that the
core players of that genre are going to
like and enjoy doing.
So we've got these two extremes and
we've got a kind of goldilock state in
the middle. [music] We've got absolute
repetition, which is going to be quite
dull, just doing the same thing again.
We've got absolute variation, where
every part of the game is different,
which can work in some cases, and this
is what miniame libraries like Wario
wear are like, but that is kind of a
case where they're doing it deliberately
to make something funny, right? The game
is not coherent. It's not cohesive. It's
asking you to do a different thing every
30 seconds. And that works because it's
a party game that's supposed to make you
laugh at how silly it is. But in most
cases, we do not want absolute variation
in a game because it stops us being able
to learn it. It makes it confusing. So
the kind of ideal uh Goldilocks this
one's just right type thing is going to
be repetition with variation. It's it's
might be balanced differently for
different games. It might be, you know,
70% repetition, 30% variation, or 9010
even. But there's going to be some mix
of these two things. I think it's
helpful to think about this in relation
to flow theory. When the thing we're
doing is too easy for our skill level,
we get bored. When the thing that we're
doing is too challenging for our skill
level, we get anxious. And generally, we
try and design games so that people stay
in the middle of this range and get into
a flow state. And a flow state is
usually used to describe that kind of
point where you stop feeling like you're
playing a game and you're you're kind of
one with the controller, that kind of
thing. There is a very good episode on
Chick Set Me High's theory in game
studies study buddies, which is a
academic podcast about game studies.
They get into some criticisms of flow
theory that I don't really hear anywhere
else when people bring this up
uncritically, but we're not going to
delve into that now. The bored state is
going to arise from a game that is
totally repetitive because it never
throws any new challenges your way. It
is basically just asking you to do the
same thing over and over again. And even
if the developer, you know, turns the
enemies into bullet sponges or whatever,
it's not really requiring you to
exercise any new skills or think
differently. So, a totally repetitive
game is going to keep us down in the in
the boredom corner. A game that is just
impossible to learn cuz it keeps
changing too much is going to keep us up
in anxiety. And uh a game which induces
a flow state is going to be a repetitive
game with variation.
And just a side note, you'll often hear
people talk about this when they bring
up flow theory in relation to games. We
usually don't actually want that green
line at the bottom right. We usually
don't want to be perfectly in the flow
channel the entire time or we get bored.
We probably want to occasionally find
the game a little bit too difficult and
we probably want some downtime so that
we can rest. The ideal flow channel in a
video game is probably more wobbly and
up and down. And this is why if you read
any of the literature on balancing or if
you watch people give GDC talks on
balancing their games, they usually
don't aim for perfectly smooth balancing
because you actually want some points
where the player is pushed a little bit
harder. This all comes back to the idea
of the ideal thing being a repetitive
thing with these moments of difference
where something stands out and provides
us with a surprise, a shock, a slightly
different thing to think about or react
to. And I said at the start that this
applies to pretty much any kind of video
game. So, let's compare two very
different genres of games. And I'm using
Vampire Survivors and Dream Daddy here,
but they could be standings for
basically any action game and any game
that is predominantly a story game
rather than a action or strategy game.
So in both cases, we've got elements
that provide repetition and comfort. In
Vampire Survivors, that is the player
[music] movement, the attack patterns,
item collection, and enemy logic, the
standard weapon loadouts, the grinding
loop with the visible [music] rewards
that you see every level. This is the
stuff that basically happens every game
of Vampire Survivors and doesn't change.
And then to get variety and surprise
within that game, we have [music] uh
non-standard weapon loadouts. So, you
get used to using a set of things and
then you get a different set of things
to use and they genuinely feel different
and require you to move around slightly
different. So, you have to adapt. Again,
this is the game pushing us in different
directions on that flow channel so that
we don't get bored.
>> [music]
>> uh we have unlocks that are occasionally
hidden in the progression and and aren't
obvious at the start of the game and we
have levels with different gimmicks,
different hidden things in them [music]
or different rules within those levels.
So, you can already see here this is a
very popular game and many of the games
that copy it do not have this stuff in
the second category because they try and
just do the bare minimum of the
repetitive stuff. they're not generous
enough with these other features or
content that are kind of secrets that
are something to unlock or be surprised
by as you move through the game. Now,
Dream Daddy is a reasonably formulaic
dating sim. You meet a series of
characters. You choose who you want to
go on dates with. You go on a sequence
of dates with them to get to know them,
and then you have kind of debriefs with
non-romantic characters. So, in some
games, this might be a friend. In Dream
Daddy, it's your daughter. So, you have
these kind of sidebar conversations with
uh a non-romantic character, and that
lets you kind of discuss the other
characters with them. So, even though
it's a story game, the thing that makes
it a game is kind of that it has this
repetitive format where you sort of know
what to expect. And then the game
provides variety by having these
humorous one-off mini games like when
you do sort of proud dad Pokémon
battling with someone and plot twists
which you would probably expect from any
sort of story. So hopefully everything
I've said so far
has convinced you that these two things
are important. And if you already knew
this then great, that's good to hear.
But I do see lots of developers when
they're at the start of their career
putting out games, like I [music] said,
things tend to fall into one of these
extremes. They make too much stuff and
too much variety before the core of the
game is engaging and fun, or they never
make all that variety, and they just do
a game that is basically doing the same
thing over and over again. And sometimes
there is a place for games like that,
but it depends on genre. It depends on
players expectations. If you take a type
of game that normally has 100 types of
enemies and 100 levels and you say,
"Well, I'm only going to do 10." You
better have a really good reason or some
other kind of hook cuz players are going
to bring their own expectations of how
much variety they expect in that type of
game from other games. In most cases,
you probably can't just go, "Well, uh,
I'm going to charge half as much and
have half as much stuff in my game." Cuz
that's not really how people's buying
decisions work. But let's not get too
far into that today.
How do we actually practically achieve
this as game developers? How do we keep
people wobbling around in the middle of
the flow channel, not in a straight
line, occasionally being anxious,
occasionally being bored? I want to give
you a model for how you put together a
game, how you compose a game. Kind of
ended up using a musical term here
again, based on which project stage
you're at. So, you're going to start off
with an idea, a loosely thoughtout idea,
and you're eventually going to get to a
coherent video game by launch, ideally.
And the point here that really relates
to what we've been talking about about
these two forces of the repetitive part
of your game and the variety is that I
think there are different stages of the
project where it's better to focus on a
different thing. And I will tell you why
as we go through. So when you first
start making your game, you are probably
going to start with some sort of
mechanical [music] prototype. And this
is going to be a simple and repetitive
thing. It is going to provide us with a
single unit of fun or play. So this is
very close to [music] that Halo model or
the misqued version of the Halo model
where it's just [music] 30 seconds of
fun. And maybe at this point we think a
little bit about variation like what
could there be in terms of levels,
[music] weapons, different enemies, all
of that kind of stuff. but we don't
implement it because the prototype is
about testing the core, the repetitive
action, the main thing you do in the
game. There are lots of games I get sent
on this channel where they have
basically not spent enough time in this
stage. They have moved directly from
this stage to making loads of content
and they haven't actually done testing
and validation on their mechanical
prototype. And I can tell that because
there are loads of levels or loads of
guns or loads of abilities or whatever
the content variation is in that game.
And there are things that are
fundamentally wrong with the controls
with the way that the interactions in
the game work which they would have
noticed if they'd given the game to two
or three play testers at this early
stage. So the mechanical prototype is
there for you to test and validate
whether the core repetitive action of
the game works with players. You need to
go through that testing and validation.
You shouldn't just assume that the core
of your game is fine and plow on. The
repeat issue that I see over and over
again is people think of a prototype as
just feasibility testing. Like can I do
this thing? Can I program a character
that jumps and climbs over things? I'
I've done it. I've made my prototype. A
prototype is for testing. That's what
prototyping means. Your mechanical
prototype needs to check that this
simple repetitive set of mechanics,
works well, engages people, the
controller mapping or whatever works for
people, all of that stuff nailed before
you move on in the project at all. If
you've already jumped ahead in your
project and your mechanical prototype
hasn't been tested [music] by people, go
back. Don't put the game into
production. Don't make all this varied
content until you've tested that bit.
Once you've validated the core mechanics
of the game, it's still not necessarily
time to go straight into full production
because now you need to work out [music]
where the variety in your game comes
from. So, you're going to be doing
experiments again now. And this means we
need to go from that more repetition
focused, how do I make a core set of
mechanics [music] that are going to be
good to do over and over again to how do
we come up with different stuff? What is
different in this game? So, you're going
to be experimenting. And this is [music]
where you need to let yourself get
messy. Uh let yourself overcope
temporarily, right? I'm not saying over
scope the entire project, but have have
your few weeks or whatever you give
yourself as a deadline to go in every
direction you could think of because
this is the time to experiment. This is
the time to try out different stuff and
work out where the variety in your game
emerges from. And then even more
important thing, what tools are you
going to need as a developer to produce
that varied content? It might be level
editors. It might be to do with how you
manage the data in your game. But we're
still not going into full production.
We're still not making things and going,
"Yes, this is definitely a level in this
game. This is definitely what this gun
is going to be." We're experimenting
before we lock stuff in. So, we've done
one round of testing and validation with
the mechanical prototype. Now, we're
doing an almost separate round of
prototyping that is to do with content
and content variety so that we can come
up with a strategy for how we make the
rest of the game. And then once you've
done all of that, now you've got a
blueprint for how the rest of your game
works cuz you now know, okay, this is
the core repetitive thing of the game
and we know that people find it [music]
fun. These are the ways in which players
are going to get variety in this game.
Be it different levels, different things
to unlock, whatever it is. And now we
can have a set of tools that actually
allow us to deliver that. And and the
big takeaway here is if you're newer to
game development and you're newer to
project management is that your game
shouldn't be going into full production
until you're at this point. You
shouldn't have a Steam page. You should,
you know, you might need to do a little
bit of pre-arketing to get those initial
play testers, but you shouldn't be going
to everyone like, "We're making this
game. It's going to be on Steam in the
second quarter of next year until you've
done all of these stages of validation."
And then you can go into full
production, which is the stage at which
we start to build something which is
repetition with variety. And we can do
this now and we can do it much more
easily [music] because we have a clear
vision of the game and how it provides
an experience which is repetitive. So a
learnable comfortable experience and
which has variety which is appropriate
to the genre and market niche of that
game. At this stage we should also have
an understanding of what the variety is
for in the type of game you're making.
So is there kind of a story element that
is there to reward players for
completing an area? If it's not there
for that, what is your story there for?
Do you need a story at all? All of this
kind of thinking needs to be done before
you go into full production. And then
when you're in full production, the game
is going to be easier to make because
you'll just have a very clear northstar
of what it is in the first place.
Bearing in mind, I run a Discord for
game developers. I see lots of people
working on their games in there,
hundreds of people in fact. And then I
also do one-to-one mentoring. And I've
been a university lecturer before. You
will be surprised at how much the rate
of progress on a game relates to this
underlying understanding of what the
game is. [music] When people have a
clear idea of what their game is, you
know, what is the base thing that you're
doing over and over again in the game
and what is the variety, they speed
through their projects. The projects
that slow down and just sort of p along
are the ones where the developers never
really have a clear vision of what
they're trying to do. This is all coming
back to this process of validation. If
you've validated your idea and you know
that the core gameplay works and you
know what the kind of limits of the
variety in your game are and you have a
strategy for the content in your game
and how you're going to vary it
throughout the game, then the game will
sort of design itself after that point
to some degree. I hope this model helps
some of you. I hope if you're in full
production with your game and you still
don't really feel like the mechanics
[music] are an interesting repetitive
thing to do and you haven't actually
tested those with people, I hope you go
back and do some of that testing. If
you've got a good mechanical [music]
toy and you think this could be a full
game and it's it's quite a solid thing
that people [music] like to play around
with, I hope you allow yourself that
time to do those messy experiments in
variety to kind of work out what's all
the different things I could do with
this before you go into full production
because those are the things that are
going to enable you to have a coherent
game at launch. and the coherence of
your game is the closest thing that we
have to a universal sort of quality
metric for games. If I ever talk about
good game design on this channel, I'm
not necessarily trying to take my own
tastes in games and what I like and
don't like and say that's good game
design and if I don't like it, it's not
good game design. Generally, for me,
when I talk about good game design, I'm
talking about coherence and [music]
having some sort of vision that is clear
in what you're doing with the game. And
sometimes that's going to produce games
I don't like. But if your games are
coherent and they're trying to do a very
specific thing and they make sense in
how all of these things relate to each
other, and like I say, it's not the the
Forex strategy game where you unlock
hats, then you're going to have a better
chance at making a game that other
people like because they'll be able to
understand it. Uh, but it won't just be
[music] this boring drudgery of doing
the same thing over and over again,
which I hope is not something that any
of us aspire to as developers. [music]
So, repetition is what makes your game a
game in the first place. The starting
prototype of your game, the little
mechanical toy should capture the joy of
repetition in your game, the thing that
is enjoyable to do over and over again
within the game. If repetition is what
makes a game a game in the first place,
then [music] variation is what makes
that game into a special game or a
better game than another game. You
should experiment with variation after
you've nailed the core mechanics. You
can be thinking about it in that early
prototype. You can be like making notes
of like how you could put all this
variation into the game, but you
shouldn't rush straight from the
mechanical [music] prototyping to
developing lots of content variation
until you know that the prototype is fun
to play.
And when you're doing those messy
experiments with variation, do not be
afraid to go too far. The scope of your
project and what you intend to do with
it should be based on what's good for
the game and not just you arbitrarily
going, "Oh, what can I do in 3 months if
I work on my game for 4 hours a week?"
You know, that that there has to be a
element of that in it. But this
variation stuff of like how many levels,
how many unlockables is a big part of
the scope. And that's why it's important
to kind of factor it in early and think
about whether you can provide enough
variety for the type of game you're
making. Thanks for watching. Now go and
make a good game or I'll set these
wolves [music] on you.
[music]
>> [music]
[music]
>> Heat. Heat.
Heat. Heat. N.
[music]
>> [music]
[music]
>> Heat. Heat.
[music]
Heat. Heat.
[music]
>> [music]
[music]
>> Heat. Heat.
>> [music]
