Let's talk about how to make a video
game that actually sells on Steam and
why you don't need a hook. The problem
is that when talking about hooks,
everybody kind of means something else.
What I mean is something like this. You
have a pitch, a platformer, but with
gravity shifting, bada boom. So, this is
your hook right there and then you go
everywhere and pitch your game as a
platformer but with gravity shifting.
Bada boom. You tell your friends about
it. You tell the publisher about it. So,
a mechanic that sets your game apart and
is designed to get you attention. And uh
in spec specifically, I'm talking about
mechanics. So, I know that there are
also different ways to use the word
hook. Like some people say like there's
a gameplay hook, there can be a story
hook, there can be an art hook. Um for
the purpose of this discussion, I
specifically mean mechanics.
You don't need a hook. So, what I'm
talking about is you don't need a
mechanic that sets you apart. And we'll
also talk a little bit about what you do
need instead. and not just a little bit.
I'll I'll straight up tell you what I
think you do need instead. First of all,
let's talk about why this is maybe not
the correct approach.
Let's say you want to make a game with
gravity shifting bada boom, a
platformer, but with gravity shifting
bada boom. This is like your Steam page
and then the customer sees it and it's
like, "Oh, a platformer. It could be
fun, I guess." And the truth is most
players don't really care about
mechanics. Compared to something like
this, what do we see here? It's not a
very interesting mechanic. Watering
plants is not a very interesting or
unique mechanic. That's that's what we
see here. It's like clicking to water a
plant. Not a crazy unique mechanic. And
still the customers like, "Oh my god, I
get to be a drug lord." And the reason
for that is because the context of the
mechanic matters, not so much the
mechanic itself. Players care about
experience.
And what does this mean for how we
should make games? It probably means we
should start from the experience. When
Paul and I made Thronefall, we struggled
a lot with the prototyping. We made so
many prototypes and we didn't really get
anywhere. And the problem, I think, was
that we were too focused on gameplay
because at some point we wrote this onto
our mirror board. Build and defend your
castle. So very clear fantasy, very
clear vision. And from that point on,
things started falling into place so
much more easily because we defined our
experience. And all of a sudden, our
prototypes became way more targeted. All
of a sudden, our research became way
more targeted. Like, we could do way
more specific research into art styles,
into castles, into other similar games,
into how to stylize the game
potentially, and so on. Way better
quality research led to better
decisions. This like an early look of
our game that you see here and it
eventually turned into a game that sold
over 1 million copies.
I don't know why I did the voice like
that. Always a bit uncomfortable to to
brag about numbers, but it gives
credibility. So that's that's why you
kind of got to do it. Also my other
games, I think large reason for why they
work is because they're all very
experience focused. Like Islanders, it's
not really a game about getting points
from placing puzzle pieces, right? It's
not about the mechanic. It's about
building islands. Will you snail is not
about jumping. It's about the evil AI,
the interactions with the evil AI. You
can see a little bit in the background
here. Then Fall is also not a game about
draining health bars. It's it's a game
about building and defending your
kingdom. So, it's always always about
the experience and I think that's why
they worked. So, what about this? What
about pitching your game like this?
Hooks are cool. I think they actually
even kind of work. That's confusing.
Didn't you just say they don't? Um, not
quite. I think I think they do work. I
think they do work, but you're putting
yourself in danger because a lot of
people who do this, they forget to care
about the experience, and if you do
that, then you're in trouble. This is a
fun example. This is a game called
Mary's Adventure. I've talked to the
deaf on Twitter a bit. This is very
interesting cuz the game did not do very
well. And this is a honestly a very
typical example of a gameplay hook. It's
like a a platformer, but you can turn
into a shark. So, it turns out that is
kind of not enough to sell the game
apparently. But then the same developer
made another game called Pedal Pedal
Pedal. And you can see it also doesn't
have the greatest art. I think we can
quite generally all agree on that. But
it did it did like way way way way
better. And the reason for that is that
the fantasy and the experience is just
such a more compelling pitch. Like even
here on the capsule image, it already
sells the fantasy so much more. It's
like you're in a boat together with your
friend. You get to pedal. So if you ask
me, the difference is this one is a
mechanics focused pitch and this one is
an experienced focused pitch. You don't
need a hook. Players aren't fish. They
are people looking for cool experiences.
So what you got to do is make cool
experiences which may or may not include
hooks. Another very fun example is Mega
Bonk, which has been going kind of viral
recently. It's doing super well and it's
also a very experienced focused game.
It's like purely about the power
fantasy. Tons and tons of enemies
getting at you and you're just slashing
them all and you get to break the game,
build really powerful builds and just
basically full-on power fantasy destroy
all of the enemies kind of thing. And it
works. It works. Here is kind of a
useful way to think about this entire
thing. I think about game development in
like four main pillars that you need to
solve. You need fun for keeping players.
You need appeal for gaining players. You
need scope for being efficient. And you
need monetization for paying rent.
Quickly want to talk about what I mean
with appeal because it's also one of
those ambiguous words that might mean
different things. For me, appeal is
anything that creates reactions like I
want to be that, I want to explore that,
I want to prove myself with that, I want
to spend time with that, I want to know
the story, how the story unfolds, I want
to tinker with that. So an unsatisfied
urge that is typically activated
visually. Most people start here. Most
developers start here. And then they are
like, "But we should also have a way to
gain players." Like, it's not enough to
just be fun. Let's also create a way to
gain players. So, they extend out this
little hook and are like, "Look, look,
our game play is really cool. We have
cool gameplay. Come in." I think the
more native and usually better solution
is to just cover this natively instead
of like hooking over from a different
field. But eventually you need to check
all four boxes. If you want to make a
commercially successful game, you need
to check all four boxes anyway. But
where should you start? I don't think
you should start with monetization
because monetization a it's kind of
disconnected from the other ones for
indie games at the very least. You can
kind of worry about it at the very end
and although it's relatively
straightforward compared to the other
ones. The next one is a bit more
controversial because I also think fun
is kind of easy. Um, I have to say it's
not easy for everybody. Like it's not
like when you just start making games,
making fun games is immediately going to
be super easy for you. But it's like
once you've been making for a couple of
years, once you have a little bit of
experience, once you know how to iterate
properly, making a fun game is not
really the problem anymore. So, uh, once
once you gather and collect some skills,
then this stops becoming the problem.
So, I do think that the main problems
are these two right here. I think appeal
for gaining players and scope for being
efficient. Those are the main problems
you should probably start with because
they're the most difficult to get right.
So the main problems are making games
that players want to play before playing
them. So that's appeal and doing so
costefficiently.
That's scope. And so maybe you should
start your next game project by
addressing these problems first.
I think you should. The question is of
course how. There is no easy answer.
That's why it's the main problem. But I
do have a couple of ideas for you. And
the first one is actually to use a hook.
And with that I mean a gameplay
mechanics hook. Your gravity shifting
bada boom. Um the pros of this strategy
is that it creates intrigue and it is
indeed costefficient. That is for sure.
It's a costefficient way to do it.
Problem is it's overused and players
don't care that much about it. So I
think my summary would be maybe use it
as a bonus but don't use it as a
standalone strategy. A game that does
this well in my opinion is Portal cuz it
does have a very strong gameplay hook.
It does have the portals, but you can
see on this screenshot here, for
example, there's not a single portal on
the screenshot. That's why I chose the
screenshot. And you can see that even
without portals, Portal is still a super
appealing game. So, Portal still kind of
works without the portals. People would
still want to play this without the
portals is what I'm claiming. So, this
is the correct way to use a gameplay
hook, not as a standalone strategy.
Second idea, iterate on proven formulas.
This is kind of what we did with
Thronefall. Um cuz Thronefall is very
strongly inspired by Kingdom. I think
it's fair to say that the advantage of
that strategy is that it's relatively
safe because it's already been proven.
Uh the disadvantage is that it requires
some skill to pull off uh well and you
need to do it best because others will
also try. Like if people see that
something's successful, then it will
spawn a bunch of copycats and people
like not necessarily copycats, but
people who are inspired by the idea. So
you got to be able to compete with
those. But if you do it well, then it's
a relatively safe strategy because it
has already been proven. It's already
like the demand is already proven.
Another example, once again, Mega Bonk.
Just combine two very successful games
like Risk of Rain and Vampire Survivors.
Combine them tastefully and you get
another very successful game. Voila.
Idea three, find a gap in the market.
This is, I would say, what we did with
Islanders. It's a very high reward
strategy, but it's also hard to find and
it's hard to verify. I would very much
claim that at the time where we
published Islanders, there weren't any
super hyper minimalist citybuilders on
Steam. At very least, not that I'm aware
of. In hindsight, I learned that there
are a couple of games that are similar
to Islanders, but they weren't super
popular, and I'm not sure if they were
on Steam. And also, we didn't know about
them. So, I think we very much found our
own niche uh with Islanders at the time,
and it worked out very well. It's high
reward, but it's also risky. If you can
pull it off, then good for you. Idea
four, start with a fantasy. This is one
of our favorite favorite methods at
Grizzly Games. This is Superflight, a
game a couple of my friends made before
I joined Grizzly Games. It's a game
where you fly in a wings suit and all
you do is like dodge these little shapes
and so on. And this is all about the
fantasy. It's just about flying in a
wings suit.
It's easy. It's super impactful. And if
you pick something that people find
appealing in reality, then you can be
pretty certain they're also going to
find it appealing in a game. The only
disadvantage I can see is that it sort
of limits other options you have. For
example, like we can't have swarms of
enemies spawning in or something that
would like take attention away from the
core fantasy. that would u make it more
confusing, would make it maybe even more
difficult to market or we would have to
use a different strategy at least like
if if we go for the fantasy of flying in
a wings suit then we need to make sure
that we fully serve this fantasy and
fully support this fantasy and that's
what Superfly did and it worked out
really really well. Another one, this is
one that I got from Gavin, the true true
creator, translate other successful
media. And this is also very good
strategy. For example, if you have a
super successful show like Breaking Bad,
and then somebody comes along and
basically copies the vibe into a game.
This is a screenshot from schedule one,
of course. Then of course, of course,
it's going to work out well if you do it
tastefully. So, this can hit really
hard. you already know that it's
successful. Like you know that the topic
is popular, but it's difficult to do
tastefully. Like it's schedule one is
not the first game that tried to copy
the Breaking Bad vibe. It's just the
first one that managed to do it
tastefully enough to actually make it
work. So this is even though this is a
very hard-hitting strategy, it's also
kind of rare. Paul and I, I think, kind
of have um like the the idea for our
next game kind of falls into this
category. Uh we'll we'll see. We're
currently still prototyping. Idea six
also from Gavin. Design your appeal
factor first. So this is something Gavin
did with Chuchu Charles which I find a
very interesting strategy. He designed
basically the game for the trailer
first. You spent like one or two months
just making the trailer for the game and
then the entire development for the game
was essentially after that if you pull
it off you can sleep very well. Right?
If you have a viral trailer then you can
sleep very well at night. You're already
going to know that your game is going to
do well when it comes out with a very
high certainty I would say. But it also
requires a very specific skill set and
it's also hard to do efficiently. And I
would also say it's not entirely risk-f
free. I I would say it's lower risk than
making the full game and then finding
out if it works, but it could still be
that you spend a month or two making a
trying to make a viral trailer and it
just doesn't work out. Then you still
you still lost one or two months. Like I
wouldn't bet on this working every time.
Got a tech advantage. This is one of the
most underused ones. It's very powerful
as I think more more people should do
this because you have a lot less
competition to deal with and it also
unlocks new kinds of appeal. Let's for
example say you have a very cool voxil
engine that only you have access to and
not a lot of other games are doing this
because it's difficult to do. If it's
difficult to then you have less
competition, right? For for example, not
every developer knows how to use ECS and
have like millions and or thousands of
enemies on screen. So, if you have the
technology and the capabilities to do
something like this, then you have less
competition and you unlock new kinds of
appeal like the like you see here, like
screenshots with thousands and thousands
of enemies, very specific type of appeal
that not everybody has access to. Only
thing I would say is that it's also not
an auto win. You probably need to
combine this strategy with a couple of
other strategies to make it work. A good
example for tech advantage is Nita, like
the game where every pixel is simulated.
This is just something that's still very
difficult to do. I think they had to
write like an entire custom engine
essentially to make this work, but Noa
sold really really well. Like it's a
absolute mega hit and that's because not
a lot of I basically I don't know any
games that are really competing in this
niche. So you can really carve out a
very good niche with the strategy. What
I want to make clear is that there are
lots of solutions like the Zven that I
just showed you are by no means all of
them. I think there are lots and lots of
strategies to tackle the problems, but
you need to focus on the correct
problems. This is the main thing that I
want to stress in my little talk here
and that I want to take you away. The
wrong problem to focus on is this. What
goes after the butt. This is what a lot
of new developers focus on. They're
like, I want to make a platformer, but I
need to make it unique. So, I'm going to
make a platformer, but and then they
think filling in this gap here is the
main problem. That's not the case. The
main problem are these two right here.
How do I make something appealing that
players want to play before they play
it? And how do you do so efficiently in
a way that's not going to take you 10
years? If you can solve this problem,
then you're very, very well set up for
success. Thank you. That's it.
