Last thing on the list was Escape from
Moo, which we saw last time, but we're
not actually looking at the game so much
this time. We're going to look at the
Steam page. Last time we looked at your
game and
we sort of played it and I was blown
away by this. I got really stuck and it
was one of those situations where if the
chat hadn't have been there, I wouldn't
have been able to progress. We're going
to like do a little workshop on the
Steam page because we looked at the game
last month and Aleo sort of suggested,
like can we look at text in the
community stream. I thought, yeah, why
why the hell not? I'm not an expert in
it. I've done marketing copy before, you
know, written the descriptions for
games. I used to do, you know, when I
worked in Roblox games and when I worked
on App Store games, I used to have to do
like the update descriptions of what's
changed in the game and think about SEO
and think about marketing language and
like how is the thing structured to make
it sound exciting. A lot of marketing
copywriting is like a combination of are
you accurately describing the thing and
are you making it exciting at the same
time, which is difficult. It's two
different registers, right? When we get
taught to write, we get like taught
there are these distinct types of
writing. So, you get writing to inform,
writing to entertain,
writing to express, right? So, poetry
would be writing to express. And one of
the things that's really difficult about
marketing is you're writing to inform
and tell people exactly what the thing
is, but you don't actually want to tell
people exactly what the thing is because
that's not how you make it sound
interesting, right? You can't just write
to persuade and say, "Buy my game. It
will change your life." because that's
not telling people what it is. So,
you're mixing together informative
writing with
a type of writing which is more
exciting, enticing and and about
persuading someone to buy something by,
you know, using kind of emotion and
stuff like that. Escape from Moo looks
like it's going to be a escape room
game, but very quickly, maybe not that
quickly in my case without the help of
chat, you start to learn that you're not
just doing the puzzles, but this
mechanic that allows you to look at how
the mechanism of the puzzle work and
work it out from there. So, it has this
really interesting like deductive
element. Frederick said, "These images
could definitely use some work. The
first image is a ladder. Also, should
think about what the images should
convey about what the game is about."
Yeah, so I would totally agree with
that. So, let's let's look at the images
before we get into the copywriting
because Frederick is absolutely right in
the chat there. Like, wherever you've
got an image like this, which is
something that could be from any game,
okay, all of the assets look okay,
but this is just a image of looking down
at some skeletons and it's like, "I've
played a Bethesda game before. I know
there are already games out there where
I can look at a skeleton." Imagine if
you were to describe this image with
words. A character
wearing a shiny bracelet looks down at
some skeletons. Looks down at a pile of
skeletons, maybe that's a bit more
exciting. If you think about what's
actually being depicted here, it's not
very exciting, right? Looking at a
skeleton in this game is only exciting
if the skeleton is in a amusing place
or, you know, there has to be something
else going on. So, there's that element
of like what is being depicted in the
image. If we were just to list the items
in the image, there's a skeleton,
there's some stone, there's some moss,
there's a there's a lovely
a lovely sort of turquoise gem encrusted
Rolex that's part of the gameplay. But
if you just list the items that are
being depicted,
there isn't any action happening here.
It's just a
a bunch of stuff we could look at and
the way it's arranged isn't particularly
exciting. So, there's that side of
things of depiction or representation of
what is being shown and then the other
side of the the visuals is the the kind
of com- composition of like how are
things laid out? What's the the depth of
this thing? Does it look cool? All of
that stuff kind of plays into making an
image of a game look professional or
look cool. This is not an interesting
image in terms of what's being depicted
and we're also just looking down at the
floor. So, we don't get a sense of 3D
depth or that there's lots of stuff
going on in the background. It's not
inviting us into a world, right? When we
look at this image. So, let's look at
the other ones and try and find what we
think is a good example. And then after
we've done all this imagery stuff, we'll
go and look at the marketing copy. And
this issue of like how to accurately
communicate what the game is and also
make it sound exciting. This is a bit
more interesting. If we were to describe
this image using words, those sentences
would start to have doing words in,
right? They would start to have verbs
in. The scarab beetle is flying, the
trap is held up by a rope. We can start
to make statements about the world that
have doing words in and that means that
this image is probably a little bit more
interesting. There are some elements
about this image that make it look dull,
like the fact that we've got a place
where every texture is the same. It does
kind of communicate the genre, it lets
us know that this is a puzzle game, but
there are some elements in this image
that are still a bit dull. But if we
compare these, like looking down at some
skeletons just conceptually is not as
interesting as like a magical beetle
flying through the air and we can see
all these working mechanisms of a trap,
right? So, this one is already more more
exciting. So, if you were to go through
all of your images and say,
"I'm going to cut out half of these
images, right?" You could go through
this process of like is the thing that's
being presented interesting? Skeletons
on the floor, no. Weird magical bug
flying through the air and some trap
mechanism, that's more interesting and
it's also giving us more of a sense of
what the game is about. I mean, we could
argue the skeletons do give a sense of
what the game is about because
you die a lot in this game, but it's not
really showing us how they died, right?
It's not like a pit full of spikes with
all of the skeletons from your previous
attempts in it. If you didn't see the
previous stream, one of the nice things
is you kind of get this Super Meat Boy,
you know, echoes of all your deaths. You
see the skeletons from where you died
before and they stay there when you
reincarnate. I really like that element
of the game, but this this screenshot
doesn't communicate that. So, it's it's
showing us something that's in the game
could be satisfying or fun, but if you
haven't played the game, you don't
understand from this what's going on. I
don't think any of these shots of
mechanisms really get across how complex
working them out is. You you kind of
take the bug and you're able to fly
behind the mechanisms and look at how
they work or fly under them and look at
how they work and then work the puzzle
out and then when you turn back into a
human and you reincarnate, then you sort
of have to then mentally rotate
everything to be able to carry out the
puzzle the solution to the puzzle that
you worked out while you were the bug.
And I think to really kind of
communicate what's cool about that, you
need to show the most complex bits of
the mechanisms from from a cool angle.
This image is doing nice stuff in terms
of the lighting. It makes it feel a lot
more dramatic. We're getting some nice
compositional stuff here. We're getting
a sense of depth. Your kind of like
monkey brain immediately goes, "What's
around that corner?" right? So, the
image is doing some nice compositional
stuff that makes your brain ask
questions about what's over there?
What's down there? But it's still not
kind of showing the the cool thing about
the game, which is these complex trap
mechanisms that you get to see and work
out and that that's kind of the core of
the puzzle. I think this one is really
good. It's a visually confusing image,
right? But remember, if you are aiming
for people that want to solve deductive
puzzles, then I think this is the
strongest image so far. Oh, there's a
mechanism here and there's a mechanism
here and there's a mechanism here and
there's some blocks over here. This is a
really strong image in terms of
conveying what the game is about. And
this ladder one, I can see why you would
include this because the body in this
game is very well rendered and it's an
impressive thing about the game, but I
think if you want to show that, then
maybe gameplay footage where, you know,
you have a second of the character going
up a ladder and then they they're in a
position where they can look around and
then you see it's a puzzle game, you
know? That's a interesting way to show
that you have a full-bodied character
and it's really well rendered. I don't
think that's enough of a thing to bother
putting a a screenshot up of it. Whereas
this is a very strong still image in
terms of conveying what's cool about the
game to the target audience, right? If
we compare it to this one, which is
probably the weakest of the images, this
one could be from a combat game, right?
It's like, "Oh, I'm in a dungeon and
one, two, three, four skeletons just
attacked me and I beat them up with my
fists." And then what's happening is
your image is now communicating to the
wrong target audience because they think
they're going to get Escape from Moo,
the action game where you punch
skeletons. This, out of all of the
images, is the one that is the most
likely to excite someone who is the
right audience for this game because it
shows the complexity. I look at that
image, it hurts my brain a little bit.
It starts to induce the kind of thinking
that you want from someone who enjoys
puzzle games. What's going on here? How
does this all fit together? The only way
I'd be able to work out how that all
fits together is to step into that image
and you can start to see how this is now
a marketing funnel and I'm being pulled
into the thing that you want me to do,
which is to add the game to my wish list
so that I can go into that image and
find out what's happening. Whereas even
if this was like the best composed image
and it was like a good camera angle and
there was a bit more detail in the
background, the image would not
communicate what you want because this
game isn't skeleton puncher. This game
is like a
a head-scratching like
physical 3D puzzle game. That's kind of
everything I have to say about the
imagery. Let's see what people are
saying in the chat and then we'll move
on to the marketing copy. Explore the
remains of the lost civilization of Moo.
Solve spatial puzzles crafted by
primitive engineers using real
mechanical principles. Fly as a scarab
to explore and find your way out. This
is already a good setup. I you're
already doing some things really well.
So, we've got sentences that start with
verbs. Explore,
solve,
fly.
On one hand, this is what you do in
marketing. It's called a call to action
and basically the psychological thinking
behind this is when someone reads
marketing copy that starts with a verb,
their brain interprets it as an
instruction and that primes their brain
to already do the thing, right? So, for
example, when you're in a shop and it
says buy one get one free, right? Now,
that what that sentence is supposed to
mean is if you buy one of these things,
you will get another one for free. But,
because the sentence is front-loaded
with the instruction, your brain
interprets it as an imperative, like it
interprets it as an instruction, like a
thing you must do, even though the
sentence is ostensibly saying if you do
this, then this will happen, your brain
it starts to think about buying the
thing because it started with buy the
buy the thing, right? And this is what
we call a call to action in marketing.
It's when you tell someone to do
something. I'm terrible at this.
Whenever I talk about our Patreon on
YouTube, I always go,
"If you like what I do here, then maybe
you give me some money, right?" And the
thinking in like marketing theory is
that you just tell people what to do and
then maybe you explain yourself
afterwards. So, this is already written
according to that sort of established
language in in marketing where we say do
this, do this, do this. And the thing
that's a nice overlap here is that in
game design it's often best to kind of
explain your mechanics in this way as
well because it helps you to understand
whether your game has a point, right?
What are the actions? Uh kill enemies,
collect treasure, da da da da. So, we've
already got that here.
Um I would say the thing that is
slightly weaker here
is that we have actions and we have some
of them that feel sort of like they are
pointing towards a goal, but the goal
isn't super clear and the stakes aren't
very clear, right? Explore the remains
of lost civilization of Mu. That's sort
of a goal. It's It's a very broad goal.
Um and it it doesn't have much stakes to
it. It's not like something bad is going
to happen if you don't do it. I think
another thing that's missing here, if we
think of the genre and we think of like
Tomb Raider and Indiana Jones and all of
that kind of archaeological exploration
stuff, there's not a sense that you're
saving the world by doing this and
there's not a sense that there's a
interesting mystery behind everything,
right? I think that is all implicit in
the game. The mood and the feel is all
there of of mystery and intrigue, but
this doesn't have it in there. So, the
components that this needs to have are
there needs to be a bigger stake or
you're doing this to save something or
to prevent something
or you're doing this to uncover some
fantastical mister mystery that we don't
know about. And at the moment, we've got
find your way out as a sort of driver,
as a motivator, as a sense of stakes of
you need to find your way out, but that
doesn't sound as perilous as it could
do, right? And this is a game where we
are dying a bunch of times and becoming
a skeleton. So, I would try and inject
some peril into this. You're an
archaeologist who is in this location
and you're the only person who's ever
been here and you have a chance to
uncover what happened to these
mysterious people. There is this big
archaeological stake of like you're the
only person who's ever found this place
and now you can't get out and you're in
peril. This might be the only chance
living person gets to explore this place
and find out about it. And on top of
that, if you don't live and you don't
get out or anything you learn is going
to be lost. The structure of these
sentences is already there. You've
already done the right thing of going
like do the thing, explore the thing,
solve the thing. But, what's not being
communicated is this kind of emotional
uh sense of peril, this kind of
intellectual sense of like you are
role-playing as an archaeologist and
this archaeologist really cares about
learning about this civilization, right?
This accurately describes what you do in
the game. I would say the order of it
also feels a bit out uh because fly as a
scarab to explore and find your way out.
Okay, find your way out is starting to
hint at the stakes of like you need to
escape, but it doesn't make it sound as
perilous as it could do. And flying as a
scarab is a is a cool thing, but it's
also like I I wouldn't put it at the end
because the end feels like
the last sentence should hit, right? It
should either be like the big whammy of
the stakes coming in on the last
sentence or it should be like a question
mark, like the last sentence is pointing
towards the mystery, right? So, that you
can wonder about it. So, I would go, you
know, three sentence structure is a good
structure and I would say
uh tell us who you are and why you're
here in the first sentence, then tell us
the game mechanics in the second
sentence, and then the last sentence try
and treat it like a question mark. Not
literally, not like it has to have a
question mark or it could be a will you
be able to blah blah blah type sentence,
like will you escape or will you you
will you die down here and lose the
knowledge that you
whatever the more elegant way of putting
that is. I did a short video a few
months ago about um marketing copy and
we looked at a few examples and I think
Dredge was one of them. People always
complain when I talk about like big
indie games. It's like, "That's not
relevant. That's a game made by 10
people." It's like, "Well, yeah, I'm
using it to talk about how the marketing
copy is written." Dredge is a
single-player fishing adventure with a
sinister undercurrent. So, they actually
start with a sentence that is just game
title is da da da.
And what they do here is they say
single-player fishing adventure, but
they very clearly
describe the game genre from a gameplay
point of view with a sinister un-
undercurrent. And this is like mood. So,
this is a really powerful sentence cuz
if you imagine there are two types of
people looking at your page and there's
a type of player that is very driven by
mood and story and then there's a type
of player that only cares about certain
types of games. So, the single-player
fishing adventure is going to the
mechanics person and the sinister
undercurrent is going to the mood theme
story person. Of course, we all like
games based on a combination of those
things. But, if you imagine these like
two extreme people, then that's that's
one sentence that is talking to both of
these types of things, both of these
types of appeals that people care about
with their games. So, first sentence
blah blah blah is a this type of game
with this mood to it. And then we've got
a call to action. The call to action
isn't download the game, right? The call
to action is telling you what you do in
the game.
Sell your catch, upgrade your boat, and
dredge the depths for long-buried
secrets. So, we're getting the sinister
undercurrent and the long-buried secrets
are giving us the mood. And the other
thing that this sentence does is it
starts with the most commonly done
action in the game and then it kind of
moves out there to things that you do
less often and then it moves out there
to the like big goal of the game, right?
So, sell your catch, you're going to be
doing that a couple of times a session.
It's the smallest game loop. It's the
most repetitive part of the game.
Upgrade your boat is like the investment
part of the game loop. So, you're
selling your catch in order to get money
to upgrade your boat. And because people
are smart, you don't need to say sell
your catch to get money to upgrade your
boat. People will naturally see how
selling and upgrade relate to each other
because they're not dumb.
And then and dredge the depths for
long-buried secrets, which is giving us
mood and is also giving us stakes and
and like bigger story stuff, right? And
you can see how it's starting with the
moment to moment, it's going up to the
mid-term of like the thing you're trying
to do, why you're selling your catch,
you're doing it to afford to upgrade
your boat, and then the thing you're
trying to do by upgrading your boat is
is to find out about these long-buried
secrets. If you're the developer of
Dredge or if you're the publisher at
Team17, turn this video off now because
what I'm going to say to Alida about
Escape from Mu is just copy this one.
Cuz this is really good, right? The
first sentence tells us what the game
is. The second sentence describes the
game mechanics going from most frequent
and moment to moment, what is the
pleasurable thing I'm doing at the every
moment? Solving puzzles, transforming
between a human human and a bug,
whatever. Starting with the most
frequent appealing thing and then ending
in the big picture stakes thing you're
trying to do, which is to escape and
uncover mysteries, right? Really
powerful sentence. And again, it's
mixing things from the two buckets. Here
is a bit about the game mechanics, what
you're doing, and here is a bit about
why you're doing it and the bigger
picture. It's packing loads into one
sentence. The second sentence is doing
exactly the same thing as the first.
It's structured differently, but it's
doing that same payoff of talking about
mechanics and theme mood at the same
time. And then explore a mysterious
archipelago. This is zooming out even
further, right? So, this is not the
moment to moment, it's the what you were
doing over the course of 3 to 10 hours,
right? And discover why some things are
best left forgotten. And that is a great
bit of a sentence cuz we've got a verb,
you're discovering stuff, right? Which
is helping to identify that this is a
game about mystery and intrigue. And
then why some things are best left
forgotten
is ominous, right? It's It's creepy.
This is the language equivalent of doing
uh show, don't tell because it's not
saying
explore a mysterious archipelago, which
is really creepy,
right? It's giving us the creeps by
saying discover why some things are best
left forgotten. It's promising that as a
player, if you played all this this game
all the way through, you're going to
discover this. You're going to answer
these questions and then you're going to
feel like a sense of regret about
knowing that, which is like a deeply
like Lovecraftian thing. If you think of
like the cosmic horror genre, there is a
detective or a journalist or something
they're trying to find out the truth
about the supernatural horror and once
they learn the truth, then they regret
it and they they they hadn't got
involved, right? And they go mad. That's
what happens in in Lovecraft, and that's
what Dredge is based on. So, maybe I
take back what I said about copying this
because you don't want to copy it
exactly because the tone of how this is
written is evoking Lovecraftian horror,
right? So, they have got a fishing game,
and they've got three really tight
sentences, which take you through you
are fishing, you're selling your fish,
you're upgrading your boat. That's the
game mechanics, and then there's broader
mood-based thing, which is drawn from
Lovecraftian horror, which is this sense
of you're going to uncover a secret, and
then you're going to go mad because
because it's so dark and weird. I think
if we go back to Escape from Moou, and
we think about that same interaction,
right? The interaction in Dredge is
you've got a fishing game, that's the
mechanics, half of the description is
about the fishing game mechanics, and
then all the stuff to do with stake and
mood is coming from the like the
thematic genre of Lovecraftian horror.
In Escape from Moou, we've got puzzle
game mechanics of deducing and like
looking at the environment and mentally
rotating and and all of this kind of
juicy 3D puzzle stuff. And then the
thematic side of things is coming from
Tomb Raider, it's coming from Indiana
Jones, and it's coming from whatever
inspired those things, right? So, I
don't know, like King Solomon's Mines,
stuff like that. There's like
archaeological fiction literature that
some of this stuff comes from as well.
And you have to think about what is the
appeal of that because that is how you
get the stakes and mood and story part
of your game, right? And your game in
this case doesn't necessarily have to
have a massive story, but it needs to
give us that sense of like what does
this character that we're role-playing
as care about in the world, and why are
they where they are, and why are they
doing this thing? And Susan yeah,
classic, who, what, why, when, and how
is all there. That's what Dredge is
doing. I don't want to go through this
and rewrite it for you because I think
that would be a different kind of
workshop, and I'd rather give you like
the tools to be able to do this yourself
because that's more helpful. And when I
edit this down make a short video out of
it as I inevitably will, it'll be more
helpful to tell people how to do the
thing rather than showing them exactly.
One of the issues with this Steam
description is it sort of addresses the
player as the player. What the Dredge
description does is it assumes the
player is already playing and has
already taken on the role of a fisher a
fisher person in a scary world. And it
talks to you as if you're already that
character. This talks to us as if we're
like the player of a game or the
potential player of a game looking at a
Steam page. If you think about the
Dredge description and try and apply
some of the principles here, then what I
would be trying to do is rewrite this as
if you're talking to the archaeologist.
And then we assume that your target
audience for the game
wants to be an archaeologist and thinks
being an archaeologist is cool because
they wouldn't play the game if they
didn't think that was a cool thing to
be. So, you speak to the player as if
they are an archaeologist uncovering a
city and trying not to die and trying to
escape and all of these things rather
than speaking to them rather than like
breaking the fourth wall and talking to
them as if they're a player. And I think
that will solve a lot of the potential
problems here. It's not a bad
description, it's doing a lot of things
right, it's doing those sentences that
start with verbs that we're taught to do
in like marketing speak, but it's not
engaging the player as if they're
already engaged with the game, which is
I think the thing you need to do when
you're writing marketing copy for games.
There's nothing here where they've had
to tell you in this game you take on the
role of a fisherman in a scary world.
It's like implying all of that stuff by
how it speaks to you, and it's doing
that in three sentences. None of that is
easy, none of that is like a this one
trick will help you sell as many copies
as Dredge. I'm going to cut this down
and call this video that.
Right, it might also help if your game
is signed to Team17 and you have their
marketing budget and all of that kind of
stuff. But, it is giving us a really
good guide for like how to do this well,
right? And and remember every time you
see this and it's from like a yeah,
indie publisher like Annapurna or Team17
or or Devolver or whatever, this is not
the game developer writing I mean, it
might be the game developer writing
this, but they probably have a marketing
expert there who really knows what
they're doing. So,
when you have the chance to learn from a
game like this, you should because you
know that this has come from like a
marketing expert who knows more about
this than you do or I do because it's
from a publisher that has marketers
working at it, right? So,
looking at what they're doing,
understanding what they're doing, and
trying to copy it a bit is is often
better than just sort of
like trying to abstractly look at your
own game and just like work out from
first principles from scratch like how
do I write marketing copy for a game, so
I'm going to I'm going to stop there cuz
I feel like we're just repeating a lot
of the same things over and over again,
but let's just pop in the chat one last
time before we end the stream.
Publishers hate this one trick.
