this video I'm really going to focus on
what is a demo, what should a demo do,
different terminology that gets used
around demos, and how to understand what
people mean by those different terms.
So, we're going to be talking about a
vertical slice,
the less often spotted horizontal slice,
and the difference between demoing
something in order to play test it
versus demoing something in order to
sell it. The current games ecosystem has
really muddied the water around what a
demo is and that is making it confusing
for game developers when they try and
put together a demo.
I want to start off with a case study of
a good way to do this. There is a game
called Underboard that I played recently
on the channel. There is also a earlier
build of it on it.io and it's branded
slightly differently. So, what the
developers did here is they used Itch
IIO as a testing bed for their game.
They're just trying to get people to
play it and tell them if it's good. Only
after they've done that do they put the
game on Steam. The reason I think this
is a good example is there's a clear
split between this early development
phase where they're trying to get people
to play the game just to work out hints
and bugs of the game and make sure that
it's of a high enough quality to bother
even considering it as a commercial
product. No one's asking for any wish
lists or anything like that until we
know that people find it fun.
There are occasions when I have been
quite harsh towards games that have been
submitted for my review stream on this
channel. It's because the game is being
positioned as a commercial demo to try
and sell the game to try and get people
to wishlist the game. And I don't think
it's at that stage yet. The reason I
think this is a example of very good
practice is the game doesn't become a
demo until it's had people playing it
and giving feedback on it. Everyone who
played this version, they were doing the
developers a favor. They were helping
make this game better. When your game is
in its early stages, it's an early alpha
for play testing. Everyone who plays
that game and gives you feedback is
doing you a favor. Maybe those people
will be a potential customer further
down the line and they'll give you some
money and stuff like that. But at this
stage of your development process, when
you're in early development, what you
are getting from people isn't money. It
is R&D time. Those early adopters, those
people who are the earliest to get
excited about your game idea, to sort of
jump on the train, to test it out, even
when it's in a slightly shoddy early
condition, those people are doing you a
favor. And that is the value they
provide to your game. They help you
develop it. They help you see the things
that are wrong with it. What are you
supposed to be finding out from this?
You know, that's what a play test is.
It's a It's like a science experiment.
You can have a graybox prototype and you
can give people like a really ugly
prototype and you can say what about
this is appealing to you. But this is a
game where we've already steamed really
far ahead with this and we've kind of
decided what we're going to do. So the
play test needs to identify the things
that the players have the most problem
with. Your play test needs to have a
goal, but the more problems you leave in
your play test that you already know
about, the more feedback you're going to
get that's not particularly helpful
because it's just pointing out what you
already know. fix the stuff that you
already know isn't really working.
And what a demo was in the '9s was very,
very clear. This game has been finished
and we have cut up a section of it to
give out for free. And then when you
finish playing that, you go, "Yeah, I
want to give these developers money. I
want to play the rest of this game." But
fundamentally, what you play in that
demo is the same as the full game you're
going to get.
>> You've played the sharewware. Now buy
the game in the retail version. I'm much
funnier.
>> The project timeline of the game I'm
currently working on, I intend to put
out a public alpha of it in December,
like a proper official public alpha
where you can play through the main loop
of the game and get a feel for it. And
my intention with that public alpha is
to gather information. I want to know
what people find frustrating about the
game. I want to know what people find
fun about the game. But even at that
stage, I will still be testing the
viability of the game rather than just
assuming that what I'm making is a
potential product and putting it
straight on Steam. All this said, it's
already been play tested. I've already
had people in our Discord have a look at
it very kindly send me a video of them
playing it. And one of the things that's
helped me with is seeing things I
couldn't see a problem with myself. So,
for example, you collect keys and then
you spend keys whenever you open a door
to generate the next room. and then you
pick the next room from a deck of cards.
And the play tester that sent me a video
was not making those connections. They
didn't understand that it was a onetoone
relationship between spending the keys
and opening the doors. So, this was a
mechanic that needed a little bit more
communication in the game. So, I added
this animation when you spend a key to
open a door. I didn't wait until I've
been making the game for 6 months before
I gave it to someone to get that insight
from them. I got to a point where I felt
like the game was enjoyable to play for
a couple of minutes and then immediately
started getting people to play test it.
If we come back to that central question
of what is a demo and how will it make
you a better game developer if you have
a clearer definition of a demo. If I
start with the assumption that the
intention of a demo is to sell a game.
Whereas a play testing prototype like an
early alpha or something like that at
that stage of development, we haven't
yet made the assumption that the game
we're making is going to be a viable
commercial product. And please don't
think I'm just being some sort of word
police language pedant about this. I do
not care how you use these terms. But I
do think you will become a better game
developer if you think of this
distinction. A demo is there to sell a
game. What type of games do we sell? We
sell games that we know people are
finding fun. You don't just assume that
every project you start has the capacity
to be a commercially released game for
sale on Steam. Now, there will be some
of you watching this who think that
everything I'm saying here is blindingly
obvious basic gamedev stuff. And then
there will be people who are going,
"Huh?"
>> They've sort of got this idea in their
head that a game is anything you make in
a game engine, right?
>> I made it in Unity, so it must be a
game.
>> No, the process of game development is
taking a bunch of code and art and ideas
and gradually shaping those into a game.
And you do that by going back and forth
with players and getting them to play
it. Because you're always going to play
test your own game in the sort of
intended way that the game is meant to
be played.
[Music]
What is a vertical slice?
What most people expect to see when they
play a demo of a game is a vertical
slice. In games industry terminology, a
vertical slice wouldn't necessarily
always be a public demo. It's a
particular state that a build can be in.
And that might be used for internal
testing. It might be that you get the
game or a section of the game to a
vertical slice level and then you show
that to your publisher or you show that
to internal QA or whatever. It's not
simply a form of public demo. But what
most people expect to see and play when
they play a demo of a game, whether the
game is actually finished, is a vertical
slice. So, I'm going to talk a little
bit about what that means, and then I'm
going to talk about what horizontal
slice would be, which is a thing in
product design. and it's just not used
as often in game design. But I do think
horizontal slice can solve the problem
that certain types of games have with
building a demo that properly conveys
what their game is about. The point of a
vertical slice is if you imagine the
game as a timeline of the player
experience from when they first start
playing the game till the 10th hour or
the 100th hour or the thousandth hour
when all of the game is finished. It's
it's in a horizontal timeline, right? So
you can imagine it like this, like
you're editing a video or animating a
timeline in a game engine. It's a it's a
horizontal line. That's the game. Now
the vertical slice, we cut across that
line and we take a slice of the game and
we say this is 5% of the full final
game. But as you play this section of
the game, it will feel like you're just
playing a section of the final game in
terms of the overall quality, the art
style, how everything feels. You're
giving people a sense of what the final
game will be like by having this little
slice. Generally, that's what people
expect when they play a demo. There
might be a few things missing, but they
expect a vertical slice pretty much.
Now, one of the things I've seen in
demos before which felt a bit
uninspiring and made me feel like the
developer was trying to trick me a
little bit was having features that seem
to be necessary for the whole game to
work that hinted at that are there in
the interface and then they're just sort
of handwaved because the developer has
just decided to give this first tutorial
section as the vertical slice and in
that section we don't have any of these.
For example, this game I played a few
months ago. We get to pick up a lot of
items in this tutorial level, and they
go into an inventory. There also seems
to be some sort of magic system, but
because the demo is a very narrow
vertical slice of just this first
tutorial level, we don't get to see any
of these features in action. How does
this all work? Like, what else is there
to buy? You know, showing me that
there's an inventory system, but not
necessarily showing me items. That's
that's a problem, I think. And as a
player who's quite critical and has
maybe been stung before by early access
games, this is not helping to convince
me that all of these subsystems and
features are actually in the game yet
and it's not letting me play with them.
So I can't actually see if the whole
game is something I would like. So if
you make a demo and your approach for
making a vertical slice demo is to have
the first level, is to have what you
consider the tutorial, the first time
user experience, the onboarding as the
demo for your game. It kind of needs to
contain everything that the game is
because if you make a game that has two
parts, like there's a shooting part and
then there's a base building part and
the base building part doesn't come into
way later and you don't include it in
the demo, then you haven't really given
people a proper understanding of what
the game is. The demo for We Harvest
Shadows is quite long and it did a very
thorough job of convincing me that the
way it had combined together cozy and
horror was very interesting. So that's
an example of the demo really doing its
job to find someone who might be the
ideal audience for the game and then
prove to that person that the game is
what it says it's going to be. So a
vertical slice is a state a game can be
in that helps to convey the final
quality of all of the parts of the game.
There are two big mistakes that lots of
indie developers make. One is that they
start treating their game as a
commercial demo for a project when it's
not actually at this stage yet. It's
still a rough prototype. And the second
one is that they do try and make a
vertical slice the final target quality
of the game, but they make it too
narrow. And that means that the vertical
slice is more like a diagonal slice. It
kind of misses stuff out and it doesn't
really give the player a full sense of
what all of these systems are. Another
way to think of your demo and what
should be in a vertical slice of your
game. Imagine someone who wants to play
your game. They like the central idea of
it, but they're going to have some
doubts about it. What would those doubts
be? And then what can you make sure you
show to alleviate those doubts? That's
kind of really what design is. That how
do we make sure that this thing we're
making actually fits the audience for it
and and makes them happy in some way?
Now, the problem with the vertical slice
approach kind of assumes that your game
is this straight line timeline. And
ideally, all of the parts of the game
can exist in this one chunk. Like there
there's an hour of the game where you
can experience everything in that time.
You can fight a boss, you can craft a
dog or whatever it is you do in your
game. You can do it all together in this
hour of game. And this is why there are
certain genres of games where this might
not be as appropriate. If you have a
game that is very slow and is very much
about unlocking lots of things, then
this is where you might go for a
horizontal slice instead. We've got our
horizontal timeline of our game
experience. A vertical slice is when we
cut across that timeline and we show
everything working together for a
certain amount of time. A horizontal
slice is when we cut across the
timeline,
but we cut out some of this content
either side. Example of this would be
something like when people release a
sandbox game, you can't really give
people a sandbox game and just let them
play it for 30 minutes and go, "Yeah,
that's it. That's the end." Because
they're not really going to have
achieved enough to get a sense of what
the game is about. There's usually a bit
too much sort of investment in
collecting things and building them into
other things. So with a sandbox game or
a game that is very crafty buildy, very
based on sort of progression or things
that the player builds, it might be more
sensible to create a horizontal slice
where we sort of create all of the game
but only through 30 or 40% of the game
systems and then we leave stuff out
either side. When Prison Architect went
into early access, it only had a sandbox
mode. It didn't have a campaign mode. So
that is an example of giving people
enough of the game to actually be able
to play a game of it. Right? This is
very relevant for things like management
games, city builders, anything where you
sit down for like four, five, 6 hours
and you play like a little campaign of
one thing like building a city or
playing a scenario out in a 4X game. For
people to understand what this type of
game is like, they really need to be
able to play a full session. So, the
best way to demo that really is to allow
them to play a full session, but just
don't give them the whole tech tree. In
this case, what you're making is
actually a horizontal slice because
you're giving them what feels like a
full experience of playing the game, but
you're kind of cutting out sections of
it. So, this might be an RTS where you
can play a scenario, but you can only
play a scenario as one faction. It might
be a crafty buildy survival game where
there are entire tech trees or resource
types that are just not included, but
you can still get a really good sense of
what is in that game. And the stuff that
you leave out, you kind of message that
it's in there and you tease that this is
something you'll get in the full game,
but fundamentally the player has done
all of the basic stuff in the game. It's
not like the example earlier where
you've got a vertical slice tutorial
that goes, "Oh, yeah, and there's magic
later on. I don't know, whatever.
There's an inventory. There's crafting.
I I'll do that later." is giving you all
of the core mechanics and then it's just
saying, "Oh, there's other content using
these." And you get these in the full
version. A demo is for selling a game. A
prototype is for validating and testing
an idea to decide whether you want to
take it to market as a full game. A good
demo should answer any doubts that the
core audience for that game have. Give
the audience confidence in your ability
to make the full game, even if you
haven't actually finished making it.
What the demo needs to not do is
handwave features that the core audience
for that game really care about and cast
doubt over your operation. Because if
you if you do that thing of just, oh
yeah, maybe there'll be some magic. I
don't know. Your game is undercooked. It
shouldn't be at that demo stage if
you're still doing that kind of stuff.
Ultimately, what your demo needs to do
is answer the questions, answer the
doubts that a fan of that type of game
might have when they approach your game.
All of those questions should be
answerable by playing your demo. And if
at any point your demo feels like it's
trying to hide the answers to these
questions from your players, they will
know. They will sniff it out. The thing
about making indie games is that
whatever space you're working in,
whether you're making the next Tiny
Glade or the next Vampire Survivors or
Coffee Talk, fans of that genre will
have played more of those games than you
have. logistical reality of the fact
that all the time you spend making games
they spend playing them. So if your demo
feels like you're not really a fan of
that genre, you don't know what you're
doing, you're feeling your way in the
dark and you're trying to hide things,
it is not going to convince those people
to play your games. And those people,
those those genre sickos that are the
ones that really really like that type
of game, they are the people that will
be the earliest adopters. There will be
the people that are like content
creators and have a have a YouTube
channel about that type of game or write
a blog about that type of game.
Everything you do that feels like it is
trying to cheat them in some way is a
death sentence for your game. Which is
good because there are too many games
anyway.
[Music]
[Music]
I'm feeling
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
