Video games are for everyone. And they can
even be enjoyed by those who live with disabilities
if game developers make certain design decisions,
or introduce special options.
In this series of videos, I’ve been looking
at how to make games better for those with
auditory, visual, and motor disabilities.
We’ve looked at colourblind modes and controller
remapping and subtitle standards.
And for this final episode in the series,
I’m looking at one more category: cognitive
disabilities. This covers everything from
epilepsy to dyslexia to learning difficulties.
And while it might seem like a challenging
topic to approach, there’s plenty of smart
stuff designers can do to improve their games
for those living with these disabilities.
Part 1 - Simulation Sickness
Simulation sickness is, to put it simply,
your eyes telling you that movement is happening,
while your inner ear tells you that you’re
actually just sat still.
That mismatch can cause your body to react in a pretty uncomfortable way.
You’re going to see it the most in 3D games - especially  first and third person ones.
There’s no one-size-fits-all solution, so
giving players plenty of options will allow
them to hopefully find a set-up that works
for them.
So let players turn off features that affect
the movement of the camera, like weapon bob,
head bob, screen shake, and motion blur. Giving
players control over the game’s field of
view angle is also good - as are sensitivity
controls, as these reduce large swinging movements.
And for first person games, you might want
to let players turn on a crosshairs of sorts
- even in games without guns, like The Witness.
As a designer, it’s good to be mindful of
big, unexpected camera movements - try to
use smooth transitions, instead of quick snaps
and fast zooms.
This is obviously a massive deal for virtual
reality games, but that’s a whole topic
in of itself. For now, I’ve put links to
a GDC talk and a Gamasutra post on VR simulation
sickness in the description for this video.
Part 2 – Sensory Load
A related area is people being overwhelmed
by the level of visual activity on the screen
such as bright lights, constant flashes, and
lots of things going off at once. This can
affect a wide range of sensory processing
issues from autism to migraines and, even
at the far end of the scale, photosensitive
epilepsy.
Sensory overload in games is generally based
on two things: quick flashes and regular moving
patterns. So identify things that may cause
a player to be overwhelmed, and let them disable
those features. Just Shapes & Beats has a
mode to turn off flashes. And Stardew Valley
lets you change the falling snow effect, which
is a pattern that can trigger sensory overload.
You may want to use the tool that Ubisoft
and the other big publishers use, called the
Harding flash & pattern analyser. They have
a service where you can upload a piece of
recorded gameplay and have it analysed to
see if there’s anything that doesn’t pass
its criteria.
Part 3 - Dyslexia
Dyslexia is an umbrella term covering people
whose reading ability doesn’t match up with
their general developmental level. In video
games, it can cause players to struggle to
take in written information and dialogue text.
To combat this, try to make text as clear
and easy to read as possible. Just like I
said in the subtitles episode - go for a clean,
sans serif font, in mixed case rather than
all caps. Go for 1.5x line spacing, and avoid
more than 70 characters in a line. And make
sure your text is on a solid background so
there’s nothing interfering with the letter
shapes.
But there are also fonts that are specially
designed to be easier to read, like the free-to-use
Open Dyslexic, or the premium FS-ME. The developers
of the pixelated horror game The Last Door
offered Open Dyslexic as an option and the
creators said that 14% of people who finished
the game used this typeface.
Also, try to avoid text that advances automatically.
Some players need a bit more time than others
to read and comprehend the text on screen.
Maybe let it stay on screen until the player
hits a button and moves on to the next line.
Part 4 – Executive function
Executive function describes the way we receive,
process, and then act on information. For
those with learning difficulties, it can take
longer to work through these steps. So here
are some key ways to make it easier.
Simplified information
Telling players what to do in clear, simple
language is a good start. In a game like Assassin’s
Creed Odyssey, characters will explain your
next objective in a cutscene - but then the
game will also explicitly tell you what to
do in a few simple sentences, where key words
are highlighted. This text will stay on screen
for the duration of the mission, so players
are reminded what they need to do.
And then you might want to think about options
for filtering that information. Things like
filters on map screens to only show the really
important stuff. Or the hex grid in Civilization
V, which makes it easier to understand the
world map.
Navigation aids
Knowing where to go can be a challenge for
some players. So consider options to turn
on waypoints, mini-maps, objective markers,
and even big floating arrows. Red Dead Redemption
2 lets you turn on a GPS to provide a red
line towards your objective. And Super Mario
Odyssey’s assist mode draws blue arrows
on the floor, which point you towards the
next part of the game.
Tutorials and practice
Tutorials are important to help all players
get up to speed with how things work. But
you can boost their effectiveness for players
with cognitive disabilities by letting them
replay these tutorials at any time. Or at least access helpful
instructions from the menu.
In interface-heavy games like Cities: Skylines,
optional tool-tips and help windows can remind
players what various parts of the game do
- even if they’ve already finished the tutorial.
Practice modes are great, too. Many competitive
games offer modes where you can train with
a customisable character, or play offline
against bots. This allows people to practice
their abilities in a stress-free environment.
This works in single-player games, too, of
course. Hub worlds, like the castle in Super
Mario 64 give players a chance to learn the
controls and practice at the game in a safe,
challenge-free area. And the practice menu
on Bayonetta’s loading screen gives you
time to figure out the controls before going
into battle.
Pause, and game speed
Another consideration is pausing, which gives
players a moment to take a breath, and consider
what to do next. This pause screen can contain
helpful information, like the current objective.
Or it can show a static image of the game,
so players can take a moment to assess the
environment without worrying about baddies
and hazards.
Some games build pausing into the experience,
like in the The Sims where you can choose
to stop time in the simulation while you look
around. Or in Fallout, where the VATS mode
turns a frantic shooter into a more considered,
tactical game.
A number of games are also starting to let
players simply slow down the pace of the entire
game. Tricky platformer Celeste allows you
to change the speed of the game, as part of
its assist mode, to make those precise jumps
easier.
Manual saving
Manual save slots let players have more control
over the experience. They can save the game,
and then try out different strategies - safe
in the knowledge that they can return to an
earlier save point if things go wrong. It’s
best when these save files come with screenshots
- to help players remember at what point the
game was saved.
Difficulty modes
Allowing the player to reduce the difficulty
of the game can be a great inclusion. This
gives people more time to figure things out,
and more opportunities to make mistakes before
getting a game over.
Most games simply offer up an array of options,
like “easy”, “medium”, and “hard”,
which tweak things like the health of the
player character and enemies, or the awareness
of guards in a stealth game, or the speed
of other drivers in a racing game.
But other games let you change, or even turn
off, individual mechanics and systems. Something
like Dishonored lets you tweak everything
from enemy damage and attack frequency, to
the strength of potions and the bravery of
guards. And Darkest Dungeon lets you turn
off stressful features like corpses that get
in the way after monsters die.
And some titles go even further than that.
Underwater horror game SOMA offers an option
to let you turn off enemies entirely. And
Furi lets you become invincible, so you can
blitz through boss fights without the stress
of dying.
So, making your game more accessible to those
with cognitive disabilities isn’t the astronomical
task it might seem. But like all of these
videos, the best way is to get your game in
front of players who live with these disabilities
and work with them to provide options that
will improve their experience.
The more you can do, the closer the whole
industry will get towards ensuring as many
people as possible can benefit from everything
games have to offer.
And that’s a wrap on Designing for Disability
- for now, at least. I’ve got some other
ideas for future videos on the same subject.
Thanks for watching! And thanks to Ian from
Game Accessibility Guidelines for his help,
once again. You can find the full series on
accessibility by clicking on the playlist
button that’s on screen right now.
