The Sims is a digital dollhouse,
filled with little computer people.
And it's your job to keep
them alive, keep them happy,
and keep their house furnished
with ever more expensive trinkets.
But micromanaging the needs and desires of
an entire family can get pretty tedious.
So the developers at Maxis soon realised that
they'd need to give these guys
a certain amount of autonomy.
Free will.
The power to think for themselves, if
the player stops giving direct commands.
Which is actually...
a pretty complicated task! These characters
need to read as believable humans.
And they need to be able to adapt to any
possible house you build around them,
or any social situation they find themselves in.
And - crucially - they can't be so smart that
the player can just sit back and do nothing.
So how do you make a video game
AI that can do all of that?
Well, that's what I want to explore in this video.
I'm going to break down the clever ways that Maxis
designed autonomy in this four-game franchise -
though with a focus on the original game,
and - let's be honest - the
best one, which is The Sims 3.
It's not going to get too technical,
but there is a metric buttload of resources
in the description if you want to dive deeper.
With that out of the way, I'm Mark Brown,
this is Game Maker's Toolkit,
and here's how The Sims... think.
Okay - decision making in The Sims
is all driven by a set of mental
and physical needs - dubbed "motives", by Maxis.
In The Sims 1 that's hunger,
hygiene, fun, energy,
bladder, social, comfort, and room, or tidiness.
They all go from negative 100 to positive 100,
and if you combine them all, you get
the Sim's overall level of happiness.
These meters are constantly ticking down -
each decaying at slightly different rates,
and faster if the Sim is
performing a related action.
The bladder meter drops more quickly
when the Sim is eating, for instance.
Maxis carefully tuned all of these
rates to hopefully match a normal
human schedule - like needing eight
hours of sleep, and three meals a day.
So. If the player doesn't give the Sim
a command, it will decide what to do by
itself - and that decision is driven
by a desire to fulfil these motives.
Now you might assume that a Sim
knows how to meet its own needs:
that a toilet will solve bladder,
that fridges and stoves solve hunger,
and books, TVs, and pinball tables solve fun.
But it doesn't work like that -
it's actually, the other way around.
Instead, all of the objects in
the Sim's house contain this data,
and will broadcast what they can offer.
A bed will say "sleep on me to get 10 energy",
a toilet offers plus 20 to bladder if you
use it, or plus 5 to room if you clean it.
And other Sims will offer themselves
as a way to top up social points.
Maxis calls these "advertisements".
So. Whenever the Sim decides what to do,
it quickly makes a list of every object
in the house - and what they can offer.
The Sim can then take that advertised number
and weigh it based on its current needs.
It does this by applying a
multiplier to the promised score,
based on the Sim's current motive levels.
For example, if the Sim is well-rested,
the bed's energy-boosting score is damped
down - but if the Sim is knackered, then
that same score is boosted dramatically.
Now, the Sim can take the list of interactions,
and their weighted scores, and rank them.
At the top of the list is the interaction that
will give the most benefit to the Sim right now...
and so the digital dude should do just that.
This clever system was actually inspired by one
of designer Will Wright's previous games: SimAnt -
a virtual ant colony where the critters would
be tempted to move by attractive pheromones.
It's basically the same idea
- but instead of pheromones,
its TVs, fridges, pinball machines, and bath tubs.
However - people aren't ants.
And so if this was implemented
exactly as I just described,
it would lead to weird behaviours that make
Sims seem either robotic or irrational.
So, many careful tweaks are
needed to make it work properly.
For instance, not all needs are equal.
If a Sim is both starving
to death and utterly bored,
they should probably eat a
sandwich rather than binge Netflix.
But if the fridge and TV are
both offering the same reward...
which should The Sim pick?
Well, more rational behaviour can be achieved
by defining unique curves for each motive.
For hunger, we want a curve like this:
now, the fridge's score will be reduced
to almost zero when the Sim is full, but will
be extremely high when the Sim is starving -
making that more important than any other motive.
Similar, smaller curves are used for the
other physiological needs like bladder,
hygiene, and energy.
However, less important needs like fun, social,
and comfort actually increase
as the Sim becomes more happy.
This was inspired by Maslow's hierarchy
of needs, which says humans will focus
on cognitive and social tasks only when their
more basic lizard-brain needs are met.
Plus - while peeing will satiate your
bladder, you can never have too much fun.
We can also weigh the scores
based on other factors, too.
For instance, each Sim has its own
personality - based on their score
in areas like niceness, neatness, and playfulness.
So while a pinball machine and a bookcase
might advertise the same boost to fun,
a Sim will weigh this based
on their level of playfulness.
Therefore, a more serious Sim
will choose to pick up a book.
Plus, we can weigh the interaction based on its
distance from the Sim - which will
make nearby objects more tempting.
Finally, some interactions can override everything
- like a telephone call or a school bus.
And other interactions can
be locked entirely - so,
certain objects won't advertise themselves
to kids, or adults, or a visiting guest.
All of these factors combined
give us a much more useful score,
which has been adjusted to the different
needs, personality, and proximity of the Sim.
And it's from these scores that
the Sim's next move is picked.
But - perhaps most importantly of all - the
Sim doesn't actually choose
the best option every time.
Instead - the Sim picks one of the
top scoring interactions... at random.
This stops the Sims from feeling
robotic and overly predictable,
and it also means they're not able
to fulfil all their needs perfectly.
Which, you know, actually gives
the player something to do.
What I've just described is a special type
of AI called utility AI, or needs-based AI.
This is a system where a character
has a predefined set of needs,
then looks around at its current options, and
picks the one that will fulfil its needs best -
the one with the most utility.
And in The Sims, it means a little person can be
dropped into any house and will
then act in a lifelike manner:
carefully attending to its
hunger and energy when necessary,
but socialising and having fun when not.
Plus, by putting the information
on the objects, instead of the Sim,
it's really easy for Maxis to add
hundreds of objects to the game -
or make endless expansion packs -
without touching the rest of the code.
And so for these reasons, this basic system has
been used in all four games in the franchise.
But, Maxis wanted to take things even further when
making the ambitious third game in the series.
Okay, so, in The Sims 1, we saw how
each Sim's personality - like their
neatness and playfulness - would
impact their decision making.
This would make each Sim feel somewhat distinct.
But for The Sims 3 this idea
was expanded dramatically by
swapping the personality meters with traits.
Things like neat, neurotic, heavy
sleeper, and commitment issues.
With five trait slots, and 60-odd
traits in the base game alone,
that's about 5 million possible Sims -
effectively making every character unique.
Now these traits have many impacts on
the Sim - like, how a clumsy Sim will
trip themselves up while walking, and
a slob will fart and burp while idle.
Sims also get bonus moodlets
for acting to their traits - and
there are certain interactions that are
exclusive to Sims with certain traits:
like how a computer whizz can
make cash through hacking.
But these traits also impact
on the Sim's decision making.
This time, however, instead of weighing
the scores against the Sim's personality,
the Sims 3 actually just adds
more motives to the pile.
So, in the code, every Sim has their
usual basic needs, like hunger, energy,
and bladder - but also five more
motives related to their traits.
Therefore a couch potato needs
to sit on the sofa and watch TV,
just like how they need to pee, eat, and sleep.
And then, in the same way that a fridge
advertises itself as a fix for hunger,
objects can advertise themselves as a
fix for the Sim's trait-related motives.
For instance, interactions like scare a Sim,
steal candy from a child, smash a dollhouse,
and write a trolling comment on the computer
are all advertised to Sims with the evil trait.
This means that Sims are encouraged
to enact their unique personalities
autonomously - while also juggling
their standard, everyday needs.
Now this idea - of adding additional motives to
a Sim - can also be used to
simulate social situations.
For instance, if a Sim enters a gym they
will temporarily be given the additional
motive "be in gym" - which is satisfied by
objects like a workout bench or treadmill.
When they leave, the motive is removed.
Back at home, a Sim will be motivated to act as
a hospitable host for as long
as they have guests around -
meanwhile, the guests will be motivated to
act in an way that's socially acceptable.
And in The Sims Medieval, a Sim
is given work-related motives
while they're on the clock, and
then loses them during breaks.
However: these motives can
also be affected by traits.
For example, if a Sim sits down to have a picnic,
then the Sim's friends and family are motivated
to join them - while strangers are discouraged.
But a Sim with the "inappropriate"
trait will override this - and
they will in fact be motivated to
sit with people they don't know.
Just to make them feel uncomfortable.
All of this means that Sims will act naturally and
believably in whatever location they end up in -
but with a few Sims standing out as acting
unusually, because of their unique personality.
And this is all done by simply tweaking the Sim's
motivations - rather than hand-scripting a
bunch of specific rules and interactions.
Though, that being said, sometimes
you do need more hard-coded rules.
Take that house visit I mentioned.
A visiting sim is indeed motivated
to act in an appropriate way.
But what happens if they stay for too long? Or if
the player steps in and makes
the Sim act inappropriately?
Well, to make this work,
the house visit is overseen by a set
of rules that dictate social norms.
So if a Sim sleeps in the host's
bed or uses their computer, the ruleset
will instruct the host to warn the Sim, and
then kick them out if they go even further.
Likewise, conversations need
more hands-on authoring to
reflect extremely specific pair-ups of
people, or super distinct social cues.
For example, how should a Sim respond to
a joke if they are steaming mad at the
joke teller? Or if the other Sim has
said the same joke 5 times in a row?
This is done through a series of rules - with
an input, a set of conditions, and the output.
So for that joke I just mentioned...
if the listener has the 'good sense
of humour' trait, they'll laugh.
If their long-term relationship
is sour, they'll be insulted.
And if the Sim repeatedly tells
jokes, the listener will be bored.
These so-called "production rules" are ranked in
order of specificity, as defined by the designer,
and the top-scoring outcome
is used to pick the response.
Maxis ended up writing 1000s of hand-crafted rules
to determine the outcome of 100s
of possible conversation topics.
But, because the rules just go in a big
stack and the most specific one is picked,
they can't clash, break the game, cause an
infinite loop, or lead to any other issue.
Just like with the objects, designers can
simply keep adding more and more to the pile.
So far, I've been talking about individual Sims,
or small social situations
like a conversation or a party.
But what about simulating an entire
town's worth of little people?
You see, in The Sims 3, your house
exists in an open world neighbourhood
with dozens of other Sims, and features
homes, restaurants, a park, and so on.
Maxis needed to invent new tools to
make all of this work - but, in truth,
the neighbourhood actually operates in
a similar way to the Sims themselves.
That's because the town
also has a bunch of motives,
and will make choices that
will help it fulfil its needs.
For instance - it ideally wants to
maintain a 50/50 gender balance.
So when a new Sim is added to the neighbourhood,
the probability of it being male or female
is weighted by the current needs of the city.
It also has a desired employment
rate of about 80% - so it can force
background Sims to get hired or fired as seen fit.
Basically - once a day, at midnight, the
town will check its own happiness level,
and take a few actions in
order to satisfy its needs.
The individual lots have
motives too - for instance,
the restaurant may wish to have roughly 8 people
eating outside, during lunch and dinner hours.
To achieve this, the lot will temporarily give
the "eat outside" motive to a bunch of
Sims to tempt them to the restaurant.
It can even narrow the focus to
Sims with certain traits - like
culinary - and discourage those
with other traits - like frugal.
Now, these Sims that appear at the restaurant
seem like fully autonomous characters.
They have needs, they have families,
they may even have had a baby and
changed job since you last saw them.
So are they are actually living out their
own little simulated lives, just off camera?
Well, not quite.
The background Sims are actually
simulated at a very low level of detail.
Each day, the system looks at each Sim,
and scores possible big life
changes that could happen to them -
like getting a job, falling in love
with someone, or getting married.
These are, of course, weighted using things like
traits, existing relationships, and career paths.
Also, the designers created
charts for what a Sim's needs
will likely look like throughout the day.
If it's just after lunch, for instance,
they're probably not going to be very hungry.
And so when a background Sim is
promoted into being a foreground Sim,
because they're in proximity to the player,
the system checks the time of day and
snaps all their motives to the chart.
Clever stuff.
So we've got tools to simulate characters,
conversations, house visits,
restaurants and entire towns.
And when you have such clever tech, it's
tempting to simulate, well, everything.
Take, for instance, the urinal rule.
If you pee while standing up, you know the
deal: when picking a place to take a leak,
you should always try to maintain a
one urinal buffer from other people.
It's like an unwritten social rule.
So Maxis added this rule to the game, as well...
but, before the game launched,
they took it out.
That's because when the Sim followed that
rule it was just kind of predictable and dull.
But if Sims picked toilets at random, it would
often lead to funny and memorable
moments of Sims acting awkwardly.
You see, while The Sims might
have started life as a rather
nerdy simulation game - essentially
SimCity, but at a much smaller scale -
it quickly grew into something very different.
In playtests for the original
game, Will Wright was surprised
that players would tell elaborate
stories about their Sim families -
embellishing details, reading into their
decisions, and playing up random moments.
"It was fascinating to me how readily people
would build a story around this," Wright says.
To support this, Maxis added a
last-minute feature to the game:
the ability to take a screenshot, write a caption,
and create a simple comic book which could
be uploaded to EA's website with a click.
The feature was extremely popular,
proving that for many people...
The Sims was an avenue for storytelling.
And that's still true today - just search
YouTube for The Sims to see what I mean.
But supporting storytelling is a delicate
balance: the game needs to be specific enough
to create stories, but not so specific that
there's no room for the player's imagination.
So the final piece of this AI puzzle...
is knowing when to hold back.
Knowing what NOT to simulate.
Knowing when to make urinal choice
random, rather than scripted.
One way to do this is to
carefully employ ambiguity.
Basically, to leave some things unsaid,
so players can make assumptions, and project
their own head-canon on the events on screen.
A good example of this is the Sim's
iconic babbling dialect, known as Simlish.
In early design documents we can see
that Maxis experimented with having
the Sims speak real world languages like
English, Navajo, Estonian, and Ukranian -
but due to technical and logistical reasons,
they ended up hiring two improv comics
to just make up absolute nonsense.
Sim: Droba droba droba.
Seeka neeba huh.
But this actually works wonders - when the
Sims babble gobbledygook at each other,
the player can assume, fill in gaps,
project their own imagination on the
Sims, and make the game their own.
"If we used actual language, the game
would flatten and shrink, and everyone
would be having the same experience",
says EA's Matt Brown - no relation.
Ambiguity can also make Sims feels smarter than
they actually are, and hide cases where
the simulation is doing something wrong.
Another avenue is to always follow
the player's lead - and never use
autonomy to go against the story
the player is trying to tell.
That's why Sims will use free will to
relieve their bladder and fill their stomach,
but won't autonomously quit their
job or try romancing a random Sim.
Just like with the Nemesis
System in Shadow of War,
Maxis took inspiration from the concept
"yes, and", from improvisational comedy -
so the Sims try to build on the player's
actions, and try not to negate them.
For instance, if a player makes two
Sims fall in love - the autonomous
system shouldn't make them break up again.
Likewise, user-created Sims enter
the world with no sexual preference.
But if you instruct a male Sim
to, say, flirt with other dudes,
you're suggesting that he should be bi
or gay and the game will run with that.
The game should always try to maintain
the consistency of the player's story.
So, The Sims has a fascinating AI system -
which allows for realistic human simulations,
and creative player-led storytelling.
And most of it is driven by a very simple concept.
Characters, locations, and entire
neighbourhoods are given a bunch of
needs - and then try to make choices
that will best fulfil those needs.
With a little clever tuning, this leads to
characters who feel believable, social situations
where Sims act appropriately, and entire
neighbourhoods that stay consistent and balanced.
But this is not just useful for
running quirky goal-free life
simulations - and we can see utility AI
being used in other types of games, too.
For instance, in XCOM, an enemy unit will consider
every tile it can move to and score them based on
factors like distance, flanking opportunities,
angle, cover bonus, visibility, and proximity -
before moving to the tile with the best score.
It can also be used in procedural generation, to
build worlds that fit predetermined requirements.
Utility AI is a fantastic addition
to a game maker's toolkit, and its
implementation in The Sims should serve as
wonderful inspiration to game designers.
And now, just to melt your brain,
here's Katy Perry singing in Simlish.
Katy Perry: [Absolute nonsense]
Katy Perry: [Just complete gobbledegook]
Katy Perry: [I think I'm having a stroke]
