Hey, welcome back! We're going to continue our discussion on Western and Japanese
RPGs this week, but first:  You guys know
Kathleen, right?  One of the folks with
"Loading, Ready, Run"?
She's the girl on checkpoint. she also works
on Feed Dump,
Loading Time, Commodore Hustle, PhailHause, ThingsMyCatHates... You do a lot
of things. Anyway, apparently she still
doesn't have enough to do so she's doing
guest art for us this week.
Yay! So last time, we talked about how the
RPG became popularized in both Japan and
the United States independently of one
another leading to two very different
takes on the genre which we'll explore in
more detail today.  We also discussed how
we talk about genres. Principally, how
strange it is that we seem to popularly
define video game genres by surface
elements or camera angles rather than by
underlying emotions and human desires
which the genres play to.
When you pick up a romance novel as
opposed to a comedy, you're fundamentally
looking for different things.
It doesn't matter if they have the same
editing style or type of prose.
You can still tell the difference.
Similarly, we don't think of Battlefield 3 as an RPG
even though it uses a leveling system in
the multiplayer. And we don't think of
Fallout 3 as an FPS even though you
spend most of your time in it
shooting in the first person.
Why? Because it's the underlying reasons
we play these games that define their
genre, not the mechanics.
So with that in mind, let's get back to
looking at JRPGs and western RPGs.
First, let's look at why JRPGs and
western RPGs are so clearly distinct.
A lot of people might start by looking at
the common differences between combat
systems but when you think about it,
those aren't really the emotional core
of why we play most of these games.
So we'll save them for next week. What's
the core engagement of the JRPG?
JRPGs tend to focus on the narrative- the
drama of the group.
You ever notice how in JRPGs the
protagonist isn't usually you?
The protagonist is their own person with
their own personality and desires and
goals while you, the player, are more of a
puppet master directing their actions
and the actions of those they happen to
be with. This division between player and
main character allows the developer to
tell a carefully crafted story and
freeze them from the constraint of a
single focus perspective.
So what about Western RPGs? Well,
narrative can be a big part of their
appeal but most Western RPGs tend to
focus more on the elements of fantasy
and expression.
Now, when I say fantasy, I'm not talking
about orcs and elves or the story's setting.
I'm talking about when a game allows you
to become something you're not.
When you totally feel like a badass space marine or a heroic Knight or a one man army.
When you step into a role and feel the
fullfillment of
becoming something you could
never be, that's the element of fantasy.
Notice how most Western RPGs make us the protagonist rather than simply operating
one as we do in JRPGs.  This is to help
reinforce that sense of fantasy.
It handicaps the narrative a bit and it
takes some of the emphasis away from the
interpersonal interactions between the
ancillary characters just because it's
harder to spend time focusing on how the
non primary characters relate to one
another but it really helps the player
to become the role.
So, that's fantasy. The other key element
is expression. Expression is simply the
ability to express who you are through
the game.
We often think of this in terms of
dialogue choices and morality systems
but that's just the surface.  Choosing
your character class in an MMO: that's an
expression of self.  Thoroughly
customizing what gear you use either to
create a play style that's your own or
simply to make your character look
exactly the way you want:
that's totally an expression of self.
You'll find that this emphasis on
personal expression is much more common
in western RPGs than in JRPGs.  So I guess the
simplest way to put it is that JRPGs
generally tell you a story while Western
RPGs place you in a story.
These are fundamentally different
experiences. They're both equally valid
and can be used to great effect but they
play to very distinct desires within us.
We lump them all together under the RPG
label, but we play them for entirely
different reasons which pretty much
makes them two distinct genres.
The reason these two genres evolved this
way may, in part, be cultural. The divide
between the emphasis on the group versus
the emphasis on the individual as well
as the desire for clean storytelling as
opposed to the much more messy focus on
personal expression may be rooted in
long-standing traditions in both of
these originating nations but it
certainly doesn't mean that a JRPG can't
come out of the United States or that a
Western RPG can't come out of Japan.
Again, these are just very poorly chosen
names for two disparate genres.
We should probably come up with
something else to call them and by "we," I mean
somebody else can. I suck at coming up
with names for this stuff.
So why do we conflate these at all? Well,
they do share one common element:
Abnegation. Abnegation in media is the
desire to use that media as a way to
just check out, de-stress, and pass some
time.
You know those days when you come home
and you're exhausted and you just want
to curl up and watch a re-run of an old
junk food TV show or read a lame fantasy
novel again or something because it's
easy and it doesn't require anything of you?
Or maybe you look at your game
collection and decide to pop in that
favorite old RPG just a finish a quest
or two?
You've got a great action game you're in
the middle of, but right now it just feels
like it requires too much effort and you'd
rather just grind a couple levels or something
That's the root desire known as
abnegation. This is pretty much the
common thread in all RPGs. All of these
types of games give us easy checklists
to tick off or clear metrics for success.
Progress bars we can fill up without
requiring too much of us physically or
mentally to do so.
That's not to say there aren't some
difficult RPGs out there but even the
most difficult ones still reward you for
going back and finding something easy to
grind which is not true of many other
game types.
I mean, when was the last time you found
yourself grinding in a platformer?
Additionally, RPGs usually offer us the
opportunity to make something grow.
There's some debate amongst professional
designers about whether the desire to
make something grow is really a core
form of engagement by itself but I'm
kind of leaning toward yes on that one
and it seems worth mentioning either way.
So, one aims to tell you a story and the
other invites you to live out a fantasy
and express aspects of yourself in the
world they've created. These genres are
often grouped together because they
share some of the same surface elements
as well as an ease of play combined with
visible success metrics and rewards that
allow us to tune out when we want. But in
the end, each type of RPG satisfies
different fundamental desires.
So this leads us to the question most
people are actually asking when they
write in. Why are Western RPGs crushing JRPGs
by most accounts these days? We'll try to
answer that one next week.
Thanks again, Kathleen, for joining us. If
you haven't already, go watch a couple
episodes of "CheckPoint" and "Loading,
Ready, Run."
Well worth your time. See you next week!
