This week, the game design discourse
is all about Hollow Knight: Silksong.
Which, don't worry, I won't
show any footage beyond Act 1.
No spoilers here.
But, yeah, this is Team Cherry's much anticipated,
much hyped sequel to 2017's
incredible Hollow Knight.
But pretty much the only thing people are talking
about with this game is its rather
brutal level of difficulty.
For context, this is a Metroidvania
about winding through an interwoven
map - looking for upgrades and secret passages.
There's nothing too strenuous about that.
But along the way you'll have to go toe-to-toe
with a huge cast of terrifying bosses - many
of which will put your skills to the
test in a punishing war of attrition.
Now, the first Hollow Knight was pretty tough
at times - but Silksong seems to turn the dial
further, with even early and mid-game
bosses - like the bullying Last Judge
at the end of Act 1 - requiring dozens of
failed attempts as you learn the patterns,
safe spots, and phases you must go through in order to win.
All of which has left some players
feeling dejected and frustrated.
Review site VGC gave the game 3 stars
out of 5 - praising almost every aspect,
but trashing it for a level of difficulty
that feels "demotivating" and "sadistic".
And so, with all this chatter going
on, I thought it might be interesting
to talk about the design of difficulty
in games through the lens of Silksong.
To look at why game designers choose to
implement a higher level of challenge.
And - crucially - how they should go about it.
I'm Mark Brown, and this is a GMTK Mini.
Okay - so the first question is, why would a
game designer choose to make their game hard,
in the first place? What can you gain
by amping up the challenge?
Well, I think there are
three main reasons to do it.
Number one is that the harder a challenge is, the
more satisfying it feels to finally overcome it.
If you breeze through a boss fight the first time you play it,
it might barely even register
as something that happened.
But if you struggle against a boss for
an hour, slowly improving your skills,
your reflexes, and your knowledge with
each failed attempt, and then you finally
topple that monster - well, that moment of
triumph is something you might never forget.
That's the idea behind the Dark Souls series -
creator Hidetaka Miyazaki says "I just want as
many players as possible to experience the
joy that comes from overcoming hardship".
And Hollow Knight: Silksong
certainly plays into this.
When I finally beat the Last Judge, my
palms were sweaty, my heart was racing,
my eyes were straining from not blinking
- and I let out an embarrassing,
involuntary noise like "ahhh!" to mark my victory.
You don't get that with an easy game.
The second reason to amp up
the difficulty is to tie in
with the game's narrative or aesthetic goals.
Like, if a game tried to tell you that this
kingdom is a place of misery and death,
a no man's zone where hope goes to die.
And then you play it and it's full
of enemies who die in a single hit...
well that's going to be pretty dissonant.
So if you want to tell a story about suffering and
failure, then the gameplay should reflect that.
That's how Celeste works - the game is
about hero Madeline stubbornly persisting
through hardship and setbacks as she
climbs a legendarily high mountain.
And so the player must also stubbornly persist
through hardship and, well, you get the idea.
Silksong plays into this too.
The game's world - Pharloom -
is a withered, haunted land.
There is death everywhere.
Other characters are seen failing
on their pilgrimage to the Citadel.
Main character Hornet must grow
in strength and wisdom to succeed.
And so must you.
And the final reason for increasing
a game's difficulty is to ensure that
the player approaches the game in a certain way.
Take the game Furi - a game about being patient
and observant as you dodge and
parry every incoming attack.
Before exploiting a rare
opening to deal some damage.
The game is designed as a brutal
back-and-forth ballet of defence and offence.
But if you could also just run up to the boss,
dodge a few simple attacks, and
then wail on it until it dies...
well you wouldn't have to do
any of that stuff I just said.
And the game would be pretty dull.
So in Furi, difficulty acts like a teacher:
punishing you if you play it wrong,
rewarding you if you play it right.
Where easy games let you get away with simple
and repetitive strategies, hard games require
you to use every mechanic, every system, every
tool, and every inch of the level design.
And Silksong does play into this also.
You'll need to learn every boss's
patterns, make use of every charm
and tool, and understand Hornet's
moveset on a deep, molecular level.
So - I think those are the three main
reasons to make a game more challenging.
To increase the sense of satisfaction.
To mirror the storyline.
And to discourage boring playstyles.
All of which turns difficulty into
another tool that a game designer
can use to create the exact experience they want.
But! But but but. Big but.
A tool can't be used carelessly or thoughtlessly.
I mean - it's simple to make a game really hard.
Just put spikes everywhere
and send the player back to
the beginning of the whole
game every time they fail.
That's done - but you've now
alienated 99% of players.
No. Instead, difficulty is
a careful balancing act.
We want players to feel challenged.
Maybe even frustrated.
But we also want them to get
that moment of catharsis from
winning before they go all the way into rage quit.
Now, I think if a game feels fair - like you
can see how you might learn from your mistakes,
you can feel yourself getting better,
you blame yourself for slip-ups, and
you have ample opportunity to repeat
and improve - then the game can keep you
in that challenge zone for a long time.
And oftentimes, this is where Silksong lands.
I spent a long, long time fighting the Last
Judge - but I kept going because
I could see a path to victory.
I was lasting longer and longer.
And mistakes were my mistakes.
But if the game is bull-[beep], then the
player is going to dip into frustration,
and perhaps even rage quit, much more quickly.
And, sadly, Silksong has a fair amount of BS.
Things like the long, repetitive journey
to the boss fight every time you repeat.
Things like unpredictable troll moves.
Things like boss encounters that
use extremely random patterns.
Things like how the ammo for your secondary
weapons don't regenerate upon death,
so you'll have to farm enemies to top up.
All of this stuff... this is
what pushes players to get mad.
To stop playing.
To write reviews where you call it sadistic.
And that also means it no longer fits
one of those design goals from earlier.
The first one - where overcoming
a tough challenge feels rewarding.
Because the player either doesn't overcome the
challenge at all, because they stopped playing.
Or they feel a different emotion
when they finally win - just sheer
relief that they'll never have to do that again.
So as game designers, we can't
think of difficulty as a single
monolithic thing that we can
add or remove from our game.
But instead, it's a broad category that
includes a whole catalogue of different
tools - each one changing the game, and the
player's relationship with it, in a unique way.
But there's another type of tool we can use.
And that's giving the player an opportunity
to change the difficulty in some way.
To decide just how hard or
easy the game should be.
Perhaps the most obvious version of
this is to provide difficulty modes,
or assist options that let you modify the game.
And Silksong - like the original Hollow
Knight - does not include anything like this.
Which, in some ways, is a shame.
Because, well - difficulty
is a really subjective thing.
What's "challenging" is
different for every player.
If you asked me to run a 100m dash in, say,
less than 12 seconds that would be a really
tough, but plausible challenge to overcome.
But it would be practically
impossible for a young child.
And completely laughable for Usain Bolt.
Difficulty adjustments let everyone
find a place where they feel challenged.
And also - there's more to
Silksong than just beating bosses.
This is also a game about untangling an
interconnected web of maps and areas.
And a game about understanding
the deep lore of its storyline.
It would be a shame to deny people of those
aspects just because they can't beat the bosses.
It reminds me of Tunic.
My wife loved playing this game and
uncovering its many secrets and riddles.
But she simply would not have been able to
play it without the accessibility adjustments
that let you tone down the difficulty
of its crushing Souls-like boss battles.
But - with that being said,
Silksong does have one big thing that
allows you to adjust the difficulty.
And that's being able to explore elsewhere.
You see, one of the bosses that pushed me into the
frustration zone was this
guy - the Savage Beastfly.
It's not actually a very difficult fight - he
has pretty simple patterns to avoid and exploit.
But, he also spawns in loads of enemies who
just get in the way and drain your health.
The overlapping patterns make it almost
impossible to predict where will be safe.
But, instead of deleting the game
and cancelling Xbox Game Pass,
I decided to just explore somewhere else.
I found new powers, more charms,
I increased my maximum health.
And when I finally went back to the Beastfly
I was able to defeat it a lot more easily.
And in many ways, Silksong
is designed around this idea.
The game is full of completely optional
bosses, and there are very few times where
a boss acts like a complete bottleneck
to progressing further into the game.
I'll explore this more fully in the
inevitable Boss Keys episode on this game,
but, basically: you can almost always
go somewhere else and come back later.
Also - Silksong has a mechanic where you
lose your cash - your rosary beads - when
you die and you've got to go back to
your cocoon corpse to pick them up.
It's a mechanic that, in most games that do this, forces you to
keep going back to the same area again and again.
But it's not as egregious as other games.
Like, in Hollow Knight 1 you'd have half
as much mana until you found your corpse.
Not so in Silksong.
You can also find ways to bank your rosary beads.
All things that make it okay to leave
your cocoon behind and just go somewhere else.
And perhaps you could even
point to the way ammo works.
Like I said before, ammo doesn't regenerate on
death so you'll need to go and kill
some enemies to top up your reserves.
This breaks the pattern of going
back to the boss over and over again,
and may encourage you to just do something else.
In all of these ways - and more - Silksong is
telling you that the solution is almost never
to just keep hitting your head against
a brick wall until you get through.
Instead, if you get stuck you should explore.
Go elsewhere.
Get more powers.
Maybe you'll find a friend
who will help you in battle.
Or that one special item that
will make the boss fight easier.
Or maybe you just need a break.
So, in a nutshell: difficulty is a tool that game
designers can use to craft a specific experience.
But, really, difficulty is a huge set of disparate
tools - which must be deployed carefully.
And finally, it's always worth thinking about how
to give players ways to adjust
or circumvent the difficulty.
Right now, Silksong is still in my sweet
spot - it's tough, but I'm surviving.
But how about you? Let me know
in the comments down below.
See you soon for a new episode
of Game Maker's Toolkit.
